Chapter 28
When Alexey Alexandrovitch reached the race-course,
Anna was already sitting in the pavilion beside Betsy, in
that pavilion where all the highest society had gathered.
She caught sight of her husband in the distance. Two
men, her husband and her lover, were the two centers of
her existence, and unaided by her external senses she was
aware of their nearness. She was aware of her husband
approaching a long way off, and she could not help
following him in the surging crowd in the midst of which
he was moving. She watched his progress towards the
pavilion, saw him now responding condescendingly to an
ingratiating bow, now exchanging friendly, nonchalant
greetings with his equals, now assiduously trying to catch
the eye of some great one of this world, and taking off his
big round hat that squeezed the tips of his ears. All these
ways of his she knew, and all were hateful to her.
‘Nothing but ambition, nothing but the desire to get on,
that’s all there is in his soul,’ she thought; ‘as for these lofty
ideals, love of culture, religion, they are only so many
tools for getting on.’
Anna Karenina
454 of 1759
From his glances towards the ladies’ pavilion (he was
staring straight at her, but did not distinguish his wife in
the sea of muslin, ribbons, feathers, parasols and flowers)
she saw that he was looking for her, but she purposely
avoided noticing him.
‘Alexey Alexandrovitch!’ Princess Betsy called to him;
‘I’m sure you don’t see your wife: here she is.’
He smiled his chilly smile.
‘There’s so much splendor here that one’s eyes are
dazzled,’ he said, and he went into the pavilion. He smiled
to his wife as a man should smile on meeting his wife after
only just parting from her, and greeted the princess and
other acquaintances, giving to each what was due—that is
to say, jesting with the ladies and dealing out friendly
greetings among the men. Below, near the pavilion, was
standing an adjutant-general of whom Alexey
Alexandrovitch had a high opinion, noted for his
intelligence and culture. Alexey Alexandrovitch entered
into conversation with him.
There was an interval between the races, and so
nothing hindered conversation. The adjutant-general
expressed his disapproval of races. Alexey Alexandrovitch
replied defending them. Anna heard his high, measured
Anna Karenina
455 of 1759
tones, not losing one word, and every word struck her as
false, and stabbed her ears with pain.
When the three-mile steeplechase was beginning, she
bent forward and gazed with fixed eyes at Vronsky as he
went up to his horse and mounted, and at the same time
she heard that loathsome, never-ceasing voice of her
husband. She was in an agony of terror for Vronsky, but a
still greater agony was the never-ceasing, as it seemed to
her, stream of her husband’s shrill voice with its familiar
intonations.
‘I’m a wicked woman, a lost woman,’ she thought; ‘but
I don’t like lying, I can’t endure falsehood, while as for
HIM (her husband) it’s the breath of his life—falsehood.
He knows all about it, he sees it all; what does he care if
he can talk so calmly? If he were to kill me, if he were to
kill Vronsky, I might respect him. No, all he wants is
falsehood and propriety,’ Anna said to herself, not
considering exactly what it was she wanted of her
husband, and how she would have liked to see him
behave. She did not understand either that Alexey
Alexandrovitch’s peculiar loquacity that day, so
exasperating to her, was merely the expression of his
inward distress and uneasiness. As a child that has been
hurt skips about, putting all his muscles into movement to
Anna Karenina
456 of 1759
drown the pain, in the same way Alexey Alexandrovitch
needed mental exercise to drown the thoughts of his wife
that in her presence and in Vronsky’s, and with the
continual iteration of his name, would force themselves on
his attention. And it was as natural for him to talk well and
cleverly, as it is natural for a child to skip about. He was
saying:
‘Danger in the races of officers, of cavalry men, is an
essential element in the race. If England can point to the
most brilliant feats of cavalry in military history, it is
simply owing to the fact that she has historically developed
this force both in beasts and in men. Sport has, in my
opinion, a great value, and as is always the case, we see
nothing but what is most superficial.’
‘It’s not superficial,’ said Princess Tverskaya. ‘One of
the officers, they say, has broken two ribs.’
Alexey Alexandrovitch smiled his smile, which
uncovered his teeth, but revealed nothing more.
‘We’ll admit, princess, that that’s not superficial,’ he
said, ‘but internal. But that’s not the point,’ and he turned
again to the general with whom he was talking seriously;
‘we mustn’t forget that those who are taking part in the
race are military men, who have chosen that career, and
one must allow that every calling has its disagreeable side.
Anna Karenina
457 of 1759
It forms an integral part of the duties of an officer. Low
sports, such as prizefighting or Spanish bull-fights, are a
sign of barbarity. But specialized trials of skill are a sign of
development.’
‘No, I shan’t come another time; it’s too upsetting,’
said Princess Betsy. ‘Isn’t it, Anna?’
‘It is upsetting, but one can’t tear oneself away,’ said
another lady. ‘If I’d been a Roman woman I should never
have missed a single circus.’
Anna said nothing, and keeping her opera glass up,
gazed always at the same spot.
At that moment a tall general walked through the
pavilion. Breaking off what he was saying, Alexey
Alexandrovitch got up hurriedly, though with dignity, and
bowed low to the general.
‘You’re not racing?’ the officer asked, chaffing him.
‘My race is a harder one,’ Alexey Alexandrovitch
responded deferentially.
And though the answer meant nothing, the general
looked as though he had heard a witty remark from a
witty man, and fully relished la pointe de la sauce.
‘There are two aspects,’ Alexey Alexandrovitch
resumed: ‘those who take part and those who look on;
Anna Karenina
458 of 1759
and love for such spectacles is an unmistakable proof of a
low degree of development in the spectator, I admit, but..’
‘Princess, bets!’ sounded Stepan Arkadyevitch’s voice
from below. addressing Betsy. ‘Who’s your favorite?’
‘Anna and I are for Kuzovlev,’ replied Betsy.
‘I’m for Vronsky. A pair of gloves?’
‘Done!’
‘But it is a pretty sight, isn’t it?’
Alexey Alexandrovitch paused while there was talking
about him, but he began again directly.
‘I admit that manly sports do not...’ he was continuing.
But at that moment the racers started, and all
conversation ceased. Alexey Alexandrovitch too was silent,
and everyone stood up and turned towards the stream.
Alexey Alexandrovitch took no interest in the race, and so
he did not watch the racers, but fell listlessly to scanning
the spectators with his weary eyes. His eyes rested upon
Anna.
Her face was white and set. She was obviously seeing
nothing and no one but one man. Her hand had
convulsively clutched her fan, and she held her breath. He
looked at her and hastily turned away, scrutinizing other
faces.
Anna Karenina
459 of 1759
‘But here’s this lady too, and others very much moved
as well; it’s very natural,’ Alexey Alexandrovitch told
himself. He tried not to look at her, but unconsciously his
eyes were drawn to her. He examined that face again,
trying not to read what was so plainly written on it, and
against his own will, with horror read on it what he did
not want to know.
The first fall—Kuzovlev’s, at the stream—agitated
everyone, but Alexey Alexandrovitch saw distinctly on
Anna’s pale, triumphant face that the man she was
watching had not fallen. When, after Mahotin and
Vronsky had cleared the worst barrier, the next officer had
been thrown straight on his head at it and fatally injured,
and a shudder of horror passed over the whole public,
Alexey Alexandrovitch saw that Anna did not even notice
it, and had some difficulty in realizing what they were
talking of about her. But more and more often, and with
greater persistence, he watched her. Anna, wholly
engrossed as she was with the race, became aware of her
husband’s cold eyes fixed upon her from one side.
She glanced round for an instant, looked inquiringly at
him, and with a slight frown turned away again.
‘Ah, I don’t care!’ she seemed to say to him, and she
did not once glance at him again.
Anna Karenina
460 of 1759
The race was an unlucky one, and of the seventeen
officers who rode in it more than half were thrown and
hurt. Towards the end of the race everyone was in a state
of agitation, which was intensified by the fact that the Tsar
was displeased.
Anna Karenina
461 of 1759
Chapter 29
Everyone was loudly expressing disapprobation,
everyone was repeating a phrase some one had uttered—
‘The lions and gladiators will be the next thing,’ and
everyone was feeling horrified; so that when Vronsky fell
to the ground, and Anna moaned aloud, there was nothing
very out of the way in it. But afterwards a change came
over Anna’s face which really was beyond decorum. She
utterly lost her head. She began fluttering like a caged
bird, at one moment would have got up and moved away,
at the next turned to Betsy.
‘Let us go, let us go!’ she said.
But Betsy did not hear her. She was bending down,
talking to a general who had come up to her.
Alexey Alexandrovitch went up to Anna and
courteously offered her his arm.
‘Let us go, if you like,’ he said in French, but Anna was
listening to the general and did not notice her husband.
‘He’s broken his leg too, so they say,’ the general was
saying. ‘This is beyond everything.’
Without answering her husband, Anna lifted her opera
glass and gazed towards the place where Vronsky had
Anna Karenina
462 of 1759
fallen; but it was so far off, and there was such a crowd of
people about it, that she could make out nothing. She laid
down the opera glass, and would have moved away, but at
that moment an officer galloped up and made some
announcement to the Tsar. Anna craned forward,
listening.
‘Stiva! Stiva!’ she cried to her brother.
But her brother did not hear her. Again she would
have moved away.
‘Once more I offer you my arm if you want to be
going,’ said Alexey Alexandrovitch, reaching towards her
hand.
She drew back from him with aversion, and without
looking in his face answered:
‘No, no, let me be, I’ll stay.’
She saw now that from the place of Vronsky’s accident
an officer was running across the course towards the
pavilion. Betsy waved her handkerchief to him. The
officer brought the news that the rider was not killed, but
the horse had broken its back.
On hearing this Anna sat down hurriedly, and hid her
face in her fan. Alexey Alexandrovitch saw that she was
weeping, and could not control her tears, nor even the
sobs that were shaking her bosom. Alexey Alexandrovitch
Anna Karenina
463 of 1759
stood so as to screen her, giving her time to recover
herself.
‘For the third time I offer you my arm,’ he said to her
after a little time, turning to her. Anna gazed at him and
did not know what to say. Princess Betsy came to her
rescue.
‘No, Alexey Alexandrovitch; I brought Anna and I
promised to take her home,’ put in Betsy.
‘Excuse me, princess,’ he said, smiling courteously but
looking her very firmly in the face, ‘but I see that Anna’s
not very well, and I wish her to come home with me.’
Anna looked about her in a frightened way, got up
submissively, and laid her hand on her husband’s arm.
‘I’ll send to him and find out, and let you know,’ Betsy
whispered to her.
As they left the pavilion, Alexey Alexandrovitch, as
always, talked to those he met, and Anna had, as always, to
talk and answer; but she was utterly beside herself, and
moved hanging on her husband’s arm as though in a
dream.
‘Is he killed or not? Is it true? Will he come or not?
Shall I see him today?’ she was thinking.
She took her seat in her husband’s carriage in silence,
and in silence drove out of the crowd of carriages. I spite
Anna Karenina
464 of 1759
of all he had seen, Alexey Alexandrovitch still did not
allow himself to consider his wife’s real condition. He
merely saw the outward symptoms. He saw that she was
behaving unbecomingly, and considered it his duty to tell
her so. But it was very difficult for him not to say more, to
tell her nothing but that. He opened his mouth to tell her
she had behaved unbecomingly, but he could not help
saying something utterly different.
‘What an inclination we all have, though, for these
cruel spectacles,’ he said. ‘I observe..’
‘Eh? I don’t understand,’ said Anna contemptuously.
He was offended, and at once began to say what he had
meant to say.
‘I am obliged to tell you,’ he began.
‘So now we are to have it out,’ she thought, and she
felt frightened.
‘I am obliged to tell you that your behavior has been
unbecoming today,’ he said to her in French.
‘In what way has my behavior been unbecoming?’ she
said aloud, turning her head swiftly and looking him
straight in the face, not with the bright expression that
seemed covering something, but with a look of
determination, under which she concealed with difficulty
the dismay she was feeling.
Anna Karenina
465 of 1759
‘Mind,’ he said, pointing to the open window opposite
the coachman.
He got up and pulled up the window.
‘What did you consider unbecoming?’ she repeated.
‘The despair you were unable to conceal at the accident
to one of the riders.’
He waited for her to answer, but she was silent,
looking straight before her.
‘I have already begged you so to conduct yourself in
society that even malicious tongues can find nothing to say
against you. There was a time when I spoke of your
inward attitude, but I am not speaking of that now. Now I
speak only of your external attitude. You have behaved
improperly, and I would wish it not to occur again.’
She did not hear half of what he was saying; she felt
panic-stricken before him, and was thinking whether it
was true that Vronsky was not killed. Was it of him they
were speaking when they said the rider was unhurt, but
the horse had broken its back? She merely smiled with a
pretense of irony when he finished, and made no reply,
because she had not heard what he said. Alexey
Alexandrovitch had begun to speak boldly, but as he
realized plainly what he was speaking of, the dismay she
Anna Karenina
466 of 1759
was feeling infected him too. He saw the smile, and a
strange misapprehension came over him.
‘She is smiling at my suspicions. Yes, she will tell me
directly what she told me before; that there is no
foundation for my suspicions, that it’s absurd.’
At that moment, when the revelation of everything was
hanging over him, there was nothing he expected so much
as that she would answer mockingly as before that his
suspicions were absurd and utterly groundless. So terrible
to him was that he knew that now he was ready to believe
anything. But the expression of her face, scared and
gloomy, did not now promise even deception.
‘Possibly I was mistaken,’ said he. ‘If so, I beg your
pardon.’
‘No, you were not mistaken,’ she said deliberately,
looking desperately into his cold face. ‘You were not
mistaken. I was, and I could not help being in despair. I
hear you, but I am thinking of him. I love him, I am his
mistress; I can’t bear you; I’m afraid of you, and I hate
you.... You can do what you like to me.’
And dropping back into the corner of the carriage, she
broke into sobs, hiding her face in her hands. Alexey
Alexandrovitch did not stir, and kept looking straight
before him. But his whole face suddenly bore the solemn
Anna Karenina
467 of 1759
rigidity of the dead, and his expression did not change
during the whole time of the drive home. On reaching
the house he turned his head to her, still with the same
expression.
‘Very well! But I expect a strict observance of the
external forms of propriety till such time’—his voice
shook—‘as I may take measures to secure my honor and
communicate them to you.’
He got out first and helped her to get out. Before the
servants he pressed her hand, took his seat in the carriage,
and drove back to Petersburg. Immediately afterwards a
footman came from Princess Betsy and brought Anna a
note.
‘I sent to Alexey to find out how he is, and he writes
me he is quite well and unhurt, but in despair.’
‘So he will be here,’ she thought. ‘What a good thing I
told him all!’
She glanced at her watch. She had still three hours to
wait, and the memories of their last meeting set her blood
in flame.
‘My God, how light it is! It’s dreadful, but I do love to
see his face, and I do love this fantastic light.... My
husband! Oh! yes.... Well, thank God! everything’s over
with him.’
Anna Karenina
468 of 1759
Chapter 30
In the little German watering-place to which the
Shtcherbatskys had betaken themselves, as in all places
indeed where people are gathered together, the usual
process, as it were, of the crystallization of society went
on, assigning to each member of that society a definite and
unalterable place. Just as the particle of water in frost,
definitely and unalterably, takes the special form of the
crystal of snow, so each new person that arrived at the
springs was at once placed in his special place.
Fuerst Shtcherbatsky, sammt Gemahlin und Tochter,
by the apartments they took, and from their name and
from the friends they made, were immediately crystallized
into a definite place marked out for them.
There was visiting the watering-place that year a real
German Fuerstin, in consequence of which the
crystallizing process went on more vigorously than ever.
Princess Shtcherbatskaya wished, above everything, to
present her daughter to this German princess, and the day
after their arrival she duly performed this rite. Kitty made a
low and graceful curtsey in the very simple, that is to say,
very elegant frock that had been ordered her from Paris.
Anna Karenina
469 of 1759
The German princess said, ‘I hope the roses will soon
come back to this pretty little face,’ and for the
Shtcherbatskys certain definite lines of existence were at
once laid down from which there was no departing. The
Shtcherbatskys made the acquaintance too of the family of
an English Lady Somebody, and of a German countess and
her son, wounded in the last war, and of a learned Swede,
and of M. Canut and his sister. But yet inevitably the
Shtcherbatskys were thrown most into the society of a
Moscow lady, Marya Yevgenyevna Rtishtcheva and her
daughter, whom Kitty disliked, because she had fallen ill,
like herself, over a love affair, and a Moscow colonel,
whom Kitty had known from childhood, and always seen
in uniform and epaulets, and who now, with his little eyes
and his open neck and flowered cravat, was uncommonly
ridiculous and tedious, because there was no getting rid of
him. When all this was so firmly established, Kitty began
to be very much bored, especially as the prince went away
to Carlsbad and she was left alone with her mother. She
took no interest in the people she knew, feeling that
nothing fresh would come of them. Her chief mental
interest in the watering-place consisted in watching and
making theories about the people she did not know. It
was characteristic of Kitty that she always imagined
Anna Karenina
470 of 1759
everything in people in the most favorable light possible,
especially so in those she did not know. And now as she
made surmises as to who people were, what were their
relations to one another, and what they were like, Kitty
endowed them with the most marvelous and noble
characters, and found confirmation of her idea in her
observations.
Of these people the one that attracted her most was a
Russian girl who had come to the watering-place with an
invalid Russian lady, Madame Stahl, as everyone called
her. Madame Stahl belonged to the highest society, but
she was so ill that she could not walk, and only on
exceptionally fine days made her appearance at the springs
in an invalid carriage. But it was not so much from illhealth as from pride—so Princess Shtcherbatskaya
interpreted it—that Madame Stahl had not made the
acquaintance of anyone among the Russians there. The
Russian girl looked after Madame Stahl, and besides that,
she was, as Kitty observed, on friendly terms with all the
invalids who were seriously ill, and there were many of
them at the springs, and looked after them in the most
natural way. This Russian girl was not, as Kitty gathered,
related to Madame Stahl, nor was she a paid attendant.
Madame Stahl called her Varenka, and other people called
Anna Karenina
471 of 1759
her ‘Mademoiselle Varenka.’ Apart from the interest Kitty
took in this girl’s relations with Madame Stahl and with
other unknown persons, Kitty, as often happened, felt an
inexplicable attraction to Mademoiselle Varenka, and was
aware when their eyes met that she too liked her.
Of Mademoiselle Varenka one would not say that she
had passed her first youth, but she was, as it were, a
creature without youth; she might have been taken for
nineteen or for thirty. If her features were criticized
separately, she was handsome rather than plain, in spite of
the sickly hue of her face. She would have been a good
figure, too, if it had not been for her extreme thinness and
the size of her head, which was too large for her medium
height. But she was not likely to be attractive to men. She
was like a fine flower, already past its bloom and without
fragrance, though the petals were still unwithered.
Moreover, she would have been unattractive to men also
from the lack of just what Kitty had too much of—of the
suppressed fire of vitality, and the consciousness of her
own attractiveness.
She always seemed absorbed in work about which
there could be no doubt, and so it seemed she could not
take interest in anything outside it. It was just this contrast
with her own position that was for Kitty the great
Anna Karenina
472 of 1759
attraction of Mademoiselle Varenka. Kitty felt that in her,
in her manner of life, she would find an example of what
she was now so painfully seeking: interest in life, a dignity
in life—apart from the worldly relations of girls with men,
which so revolted Kitty, and appeared to her now as a
shameful hawking about of goods in search of a purchaser.
The more attentively Kitty watched her unknown friend,
the more convinced she was this girl was the perfect
creature she fancied her, and the more eagerly she wished
to make her acquaintance.
The two girls used to meet several times a day, and
every time they met, Kitty’s eyes said: ‘Who are you?
What are you? Are you really the exquisite creature I
imagine you to be? But for goodness’ sake don’t suppose,’
her eyes added, ‘that I would force my acquaintance on
you, I simply admire you and like you.’ ‘I like you too,
and you’re very, very sweet. And I should like you better
still, if I had time,’ answered the eyes of the unknown girl.
Kitty saw indeed, that she was always busy. Either she was
taking the children of a Russian family home from the
springs, or fetching a shawl for a sick lady, and wrapping
her up in it, or trying to interest an irritable invalid, or
selecting and buying cakes for tea for someone.
Anna Karenina
473 of 1759
Soon after the arrival of the Shtcherbatskys there
appeared in the morning crowd at the springs two persons
who attracted universal and unfavorable attention. These
were a tall man with a stooping figure, and huge hands, in
an old coat too short for him, with black, simple, and yet
terrible eyes, and a pockmarked, kind-looking woman,
very badly and tastelessly dressed. Recognizing these
persons as Russians, Kitty had already in her imagination
begun constructing a delightful and touching romance
about them. But the princess, having ascertained from the
visitors’ list that this was Nikolay Levin and Marya
Nikolaevna, explained to Kitty what a bad man this Levin
was, and all her fancies about these two people vanished.
Not so much from what her mother told her, as from the
fact that it was Konstantin’s brother, this pair suddenly
seemed to Kitty intensely unpleasant. This Levin, with his
continual twitching of his head, aroused in her now an
irrepressible feeling of disgust.
It seemed to her that his big, terrible eyes, which
persistently pursued her, expressed a feeling of hatred and
contempt, and she tried to avoid meeting him.
Anna Karenina
474 of 1759
Chapter 31
It was a wet day; it had been raining all the morning,
and the invalids, with their parasols, had flocked into the
arcades.
Kitty was walking there with her mother and the
Moscow colonel, smart and jaunty in his European coat,
bought ready-made at Frankfort. They were walking on
one side of the arcade, trying to avoid Levin, who was
walking on the other side. Varenka, in her dark dress, in a
black hat with a turndown brim, was walking up and
down the whole length of the arcade with a blind
Frenchwoman, and, every time she met Kitty, they
exchanged friendly glances.
‘Mamma, couldn’t I speak to her?’ said Kitty, watching
her unknown friend, and noticing that she was going up
to the spring, and that they might come there together.
‘Oh, if you want to so much, I’ll find out about her
first and make her acquaintance myself,’ answered her
mother. ‘What do you see in her out of the way? A
companion, she must be. If you like, I’ll make
acquaintance with Madame Stahl; I used to know her
belle-seur,’ added the princess, lifting her head haughtily.
Anna Karenina
475 of 1759
Kitty knew that the princess was offended that Madame
Stahl had seemed to avoid making her acquaintance. Kitty
did not insist.
‘How wonderfully sweet she is!’ she said, gazing at
Varenka just as she handed a glass to the Frenchwoman.
‘Look how natural and sweet it all is.’
‘It’s so funny to see your engouements,’ said the
princess. ‘No, we’d better go back,’ she added, noticing
Levin coming towards them with his companion and a
German doctor, to whom he was talking very noisily and
angrily.
They turned to go back, when suddenly they heard,
not noisy talk, but shouting. Levin, stopping short, was
shouting at the doctor, and the doctor, too, was excited. A
crowd gathered about them. The princess and Kitty beat a
hasty retreat, while the colonel joined the crowd to find
out what was the matter.
A few minutes later the colonel overtook them.
‘What was it?’ inquired the princess.
‘Scandalous and disgraceful!’ answered the colonel.
‘The one thing to be dreaded is meeting Russians abroad.
That tall gentleman was abusing the doctor, flinging all
sorts of insults at him because he wasn’t treating him quite
Anna Karenina
476 of 1759
as he liked, and he began waving his stick at him. It’s
simply a scandal!’
‘Oh, how unpleasant!’ said the princess. ‘Well, and
how did it end?’
‘Luckily at that point that...the one in the mushroom
hat... intervened. A Russian lady, I think she is,’ said the
colonel.
‘Mademoiselle Varenka?’ asked Kitty.
‘Yes, yes. She came to the rescue before anyone; she
took the man by the arm and led him away.’
‘There, mamma,’ said Kitty; ‘you wonder that I’m
enthusiastic about her.’
The next day, as she watched her unknown friend,
Kitty noticed that Mademoiselle Varenka was already on
the same terms with Levin and his companion as with her
other proteges. She went up to them, entered into
conversation with them, and served as interpreter for the
woman, who could not speak any foreign language.
Kitty began to entreat her mother still more urgently to
let her make friends with Varenka. And, disagreeable as it
was to the princess to seem to take the first step in wishing
to make the acquaintance of Madame Stahl,who thought
fit to give herself airs, she made inquiries about Varenka,
and, having ascertained particulars about her tending to
Anna Karenina
477 of 1759
prove that there could be no harm though little good in
the acquaintance, she herself approached Varenka and
made acquaintance with her.
Choosing a time when her daughter had gone to the
spring, while Varenka had stopped outside the baker’s, the
princess went up to her.
‘Allow me to make your acquaintance,’ she said, with
her dignified smile. ‘My daughter has lost her heart to
you,’ she said. ‘Possibly you do not know me. I am..’
‘That feeling is more than reciprocal, princess,’ Varenka
answered hurriedly.
‘What a good deed you did yesterday to our poor
compatriot!’ said the princess.
Varenka flushed a little. ‘I don’t remember. I don’t
think I did anything,’ she said.
‘Why, you saved that Levin from disagreeable
consequences.’
‘Yes, sa compagne called me, and I tried to pacify him,
he’s very ill and was dissatisfied with the doctor. I’m used
to looking after such invalids.’
‘Yes, I’ve heard you live at Mentone with your aunt—I
think— Madame Stahl: I used to know her belle-soeur.’
Anna Karenina
478 of 1759
‘No, she’s not my aunt. I call her mamma, but I am not
related to her; I was brought up by her,’ answered
Varenka, flushing a little again.
This was so simply said, and so sweet was the truthful
and candid expression of her face, that the princess saw
why Kitty had taken such a fancy to Varenka.
‘Well, and what’s this Levin going to do?’ asked the
princess.
‘He’s going away,’ answered Varenka.
At that instant Kitty came up from the spring beaming
with delight that her mother had become acquainted with
her unknown friend.
‘Well, see, Kitty, your intense desire to make friends
with Mademoiselle . . .’
‘Varenka,’ Varenka put in smiling, ‘that’s what
everyone calls me.’
Kitty blushed with pleasure, and slowly, without
speaking, pressed her new friend’s hand, which did not
respond to her pressure, but lay motionless in her hand.
The hand did not respond to her pressure, but the face of
Mademoiselle Varenka glowed with a soft, glad, though
rather mournful smile, that showed large but handsome
teeth.
‘I have long wished for this too,’ she said.
Anna Karenina
479 of 1759
‘But you are so busy.’
‘Oh, no, I’m not at all busy,’ answered Varenka, but at
that moment she had to leave her new friends because two
little Russian girls, children of an invalid, ran up to her.
‘Varenka, mamma’s calling!’ they cried.
And Varenka went after them.
Anna Karenina
480 of 1759
Chapter 32
The particulars which the princess had learned in regard
to Varenka’s past and her relations with Madame Stahl
were as follows:
Madame Stahl, of whom some people said that she had
worried her husband out of his life, while others said it
was he who had made her wretched by his immoral
behavior, had always been a woman of weak health and
enthusiastic temperament. When, after her separation from
her husband, she gave birth to her only child, the child
had died almost immediately, and the family of Madame
Stahl, knowing her sensibility, and fearing the news would
kill her, had substituted another child, a baby born the
same night and in the same house in Petersburg, the
daughter of the chief cook of the Imperial Household.
This was Varenka. Madame Stahl learned later on that
Varenka was not her own child, but she went on bringing
her up, especially as very soon afterwards Varenka had not
a relation of her own living. Madame Stahl had now been
living more than ten years continuously abroad, in the
south, never leaving her couch. And some people said that
Madame Stahl had made her social position as a
Anna Karenina
481 of 1759
philanthropic, highly religious woman; other people said
she really was at heart the highly ethical being, living for
nothing but the good of her fellow creatures, which she
represented herself to be. No one knew what her faith
was—Catholic, Protestant, or Orthodox. But one fact was
indubitable—she was in amicable relations with the
highest dignitaries of all the churches and sects.
Varenka lived with her all the while abroad, and
everyone who knew Madame Stahl knew and liked
Mademoiselle Varenka, as everyone called her.
Having learned all these facts, the princess found
nothing to object to in her daughter’s intimacy with
Varenka, more especially as Varenka’s breeding and
education were of the best—she spoke French and English
extremely well—and what was of the most weight,
brought a message from Madame Stahl expressing her
regret that she was prevented by her ill health from
making the acquaintance of the princess.
After getting to know Varenka, Kitty became more and
more fascinated by her friend, and every day she
discovered new virtues in her.
The princess, hearing that Varenka had a good voice,
asked her to come and sing to them in the evening.
Anna Karenina
482 of 1759
‘Kitty plays, and we have a piano, not a good one, it’s
true, but you will give us so much pleasure,’ said the
princess with her affected smile, which Kitty disliked
particularly just then, because she noticed that Varenka
had no inclination to sing. Varenka came, however, in the
evening and brought a roll of music with her. The princess
had invited Marya Yevgenyevna and her daughter and the
colonel.
Varenka seemed quite unaffected by there being
persons present she did not know, and she went directly to
the piano. She could not accompany herself, but she could
sing music at sight very well. Kitty, who played well,
accompanied her.
‘You have an extraordinary talent,’ the princess said to
her after Varenka had sung the first song extremely well.
Marya Yevgenyevna and her daughter expressed their
thanks and admiration.
‘Look,’ said the colonel, looking out of the window,
‘what an audience has collected to listen to you.’ There
actually was quite a considerable crowd under the
windows.
‘I am very glad it gives you pleasure,’ Varenka
answered simply.
Anna Karenina
483 of 1759
Kitty looked with pride at her friend. She was
enchanted by her talent, and her voice and her face, but
most of all by her manner, by the way Varenka obviously
thought nothing of her singing and was quite unmoved by
their praises. She seemed only to be asking: ‘Am I to sing
again, or is that enough?’
‘If it had been I,’ thought Kitty, ‘how proud I should
have been! How delighted I should have been to see that
crowd under the windows! But she’s utterly unmoved by
it. Her only motive is to avoid refusing and to please
mamma. What is there in her? What is it gives her the
power to look down on everything, to be calm
independently of everything? How I should like to know
it and to learn it of her!’ thought Kitty, gazing into her
serene face. The princess asked Varenka to sing again, and
Varenka sang another song, also smoothly, distinctly, and
well, standing erect at the piano and beating time on it
with her thin, dark-skinned hand.
The next song in the book was an Italian one. Kitty
played the opening bars, and looked round at Varenka.
‘Let’s skip that,’ said Varenka, flushing a little. Kitty let
her eyes rest on Varenka’s face, with a look of dismay and
inquiry.
Anna Karenina
484 of 1759
‘Very well, the next one,’ she said hurriedly, turning
over the pages, and at once feeling that there was
something connected with the song.
‘No,’ answered Varenka with a smile, laying her hand
on the music, ‘no, let’s have that one.’ And she sang it just
as quietly, as coolly, and as well as the others.
When she had finished, they all thanked her again, and
went off to tea. Kitty and Varenka went out into the little
garden that adjoined the house.
‘Am I right, that you have some reminiscences
connected with that song?’ said Kitty. ‘Don’t tell me,’ she
added hastily, ‘only say if I’m right.’
‘No, why not? I’ll tell you simply,’ said Varenka, and,
without waiting for a reply, she went on: ‘Yes, it brings up
memories, once painful ones. I cared for someone once,
and I used to sing him that song.’
Kitty with big, wide-open eyes gazed silently,
sympathetically at Varenka.
‘I cared for him, and he cared for me; but his mother
did not wish it, and he married another girl. He’s living
now not far from us, and I see him sometimes. You didn’t
think I had a love story too,’ she said, and there was a faint
gleam in her handsome face of that fire which Kitty felt
must once have glowed all over her.
Anna Karenina
485 of 1759
‘I didn’t think so? Why, if I were a man, I could never
care for anyone else after knowing you. Only I can’t
understand how he could, to please his mother, forget you
and make you unhappy; he had no heart.’
‘Oh, no, he’s a very good man, and I’m not unhappy;
quite the contrary, I’m very happy. Well, so we shan’t be
singing any more now,’ she added, turning towards the
house.
‘How good you are! how good you are!’ cried Kitty,
and stopping her, she kissed her. ‘If I could only be even a
little like you!’
‘Why should you be like anyone? You’re nice as you
are,’ said Varenka, smiling her gentle, weary smile.
‘No, I’m not nice at all. Come, tell me.... Stop a
minute, let’s sit down,’ said Kitty, making her sit down
again beside her. ‘Tell me, isn’t it humiliating to think that
a man has disdained your love, that he hasn’t cared for
it?..’
‘But he didn’t disdain it; I believe he cared for me, but
he was a dutiful son..’
‘Yes, but if it hadn’t been on account of his mother, if
it had been his own doing?...’ said Kitty, feeling she was
giving away her secret, and that her face, burning with the
flush of shame, had betrayed her already.
Anna Karenina
486 of 1759
‘I that case he would have done wrong, and I should
not have regretted him,’ answered Varenka, evidently
realizing that they were now talking not of her, but of
Kitty.
‘But the humiliation,’ said Kitty, ‘the humiliation one
can never forget, can never forget,’ she said, remembering
her look at the last ball during the pause in the music.
‘Where is the humiliation? Why, you did nothing
wrong?’
‘Worse than wrong—shameful.’
Varenka shook her head and laid her hand on Kitty’s
hand.
‘Why, what is there shameful?’ she said. ‘You didn’t tell
a man, who didn’t care for you, that you loved him, did
you?’
‘Of course not, I never said a word, but he knew it.
No, no, there are looks, there are ways; I can’t forget it, if
I live a hundred years.’
‘Why so? I don’t understand. The whole point is
whether you love him now or not,’ said Varenka, who
called everything by its name.
‘I hate him; I can’t forgive myself.’
‘Why, what for?’
‘The shame, the humiliation!’
Anna Karenina
487 of 1759
‘Oh! if everyone were as sensitive as you are!’ said
Varenka. ‘There isn’t a girl who hasn’t been through the
same. And it’s all so unimportant.’
‘Why, what is important?’ said Kitty, looking into her
face with inquisitive wonder.
‘Oh, there’s so much that’s important,’ said Varenka,
smiling.
‘Why, what?’
‘Oh, so much that’s more important,’ answered
Varenka, not knowing what to say. But at that instant they
heard the princess’s voice from the window. ‘Kitty, it’s
cold! Either get a shawl, or come indoors.’
‘It really is time to go in!’ said Varenka, getting up. ‘I
have to go on to Madame Berthe’s; she asked me to.’
Kitty held her by the hand, and with passionate
curiosity and entreaty her eyes asked her: ‘What is it, what
is this of such importance that gives you such tranquillity?
You know, tell me!’ But Varenka did not even know
what Kitty’s eyes were asking her. She merely thought
that she had to go to see Madame Berthe too that evening,
and to make haste home in time for maman’s tea at twelve
o’clock. She went indoors, collected her music, and saying
good-bye to everyone, was about to go.
‘Allow me to see you home,’ said the colonel.
Anna Karenina
488 of 1759
‘Yes, how can you go alone at night like this?’ chimed
in the princess. ‘Anyway, I’ll send Parasha.’
Kitty saw that Varenka could hardly restrain a smile at
the idea that she needed an escort.
‘No, I always go about alone and nothing ever happens
to me,’ she said, taking her hat. And kissing Kitty once
more, without saying what was important, she stepped out
courageously with the music under her arm and vanished
into the twilight of the summer night, bearing away with
her her secret of what was important and what gave her
the calm and dignity so much to be envied.
Anna Karenina
489 of 1759
Chapter 33
Kitty made the acquaintance of Madame Stahl too, and
this acquaintance, together with her friendship with
Varenka, did not merely exercise a great influence on her,
it also comforted her in her mental distress. She found this
comfort through a completely new world being opened to
her by means of this acquaintance, a world having nothing
in common with her past, an exalted, noble world, from
the height of which she could contemplate her past
calmly. It was revealed to her that besides the instinctive
life to which Kitty had given herself up hitherto there was
a spiritual life. This life was disclosed in religion, but a
religion having nothing in common with that one which
Kitty had known from childhood, and which found
expression in litanies and all-night services at the Widow’s
Home, where one might meet one’s friends, and in
learning by heart Slavonic texts with the priest. This was a
lofty, mysterious religion connected with a whole series of
noble thoughts and feelings, which one could do more
than merely believe because one was told to, which one
could love.
Anna Karenina
490 of 1759
Kitty found all this out not from words. Madame Stahl
talked to Kitty as to a charming child that one looks on
with pleasure as on the memory of one’s youth, and only
once she said in passing that in all human sorrows nothing
gives comfort but love and faith, and that in the sight of
Christ’s compassion for us no sorrow is trifling—and
immediately talked of other things. But in every gesture of
Madame Stahl, in every word, in every heavenly—as Kitty
called it—look, and above all in the whole story of her
life, which she heard from Varenka, Kitty recognized that
something ‘that was important,’ of which, till then, she
had known nothing.
Yet, elevated as Madame Stahl’s character was,
touching as was her story, and exalted and moving as was
her speech, Kitty could not help detecting in her some
traits which perplexed her. She noticed that when
questioning her about her family, Madame Stahl had
smiled contemptuously, which was not in accord with
Christian meekness. She noticed, too, that when she had
found a Catholic priest with her, Madame Stahl had
studiously kept her face in the shadow of the lamp-shade
and had smiled in a peculiar way. Trivial as these two
observations were, they perplexed her, and she had her
doubts as to Madame Stahl. But on the other hand
Anna Karenina
491 of 1759
Varenka, alone in the world, without friends or relations,
with a melancholy disappointment in the past, desiring
nothing, regretting nothing, was just that perfection of
which Kitty dared hardly dream. In Varenka she realized
that one has but to forget oneself and love others, and one
will be calm, happy, and noble. And that was what Kitty
longed to be. Seeing now clearly what was the most
important, Kitty was not satisfied with being enthusiastic
over it; she at once gave herself up with her whole soul to
the new life that was opening to her. From Varenka’s
accounts of the doings of Madame Stahl and other people
whom she mentioned, Kitty had already constructed the
plan of her own future life. She would, like Madame
Stahl’s niece, Aline, of whom Varenka had talked to her a
great deal, seek out those who were in trouble, wherever
she might be living, help them as far as she could, give
them the Gospel, read the Gospel to the sick, the
criminals, to the dying. The idea of reading the Gospel to
criminals, as Aline did, particularly fascinated Kitty. But all
these were secret dreams, of which Kitty did not talk
either to her mother or to Varenka.
While awaiting the time for carrying out her plans on a
large scale, however, Kitty, even then at the springs,
where there were so many people ill and unhappy, readily
Anna Karenina
492 of 1759
found a chance for practicing her new principles in
imitation of Varenka.
At first the princess noticed nothing but that Kitty was
much under the influence of her engouement, as she
called it, for Madame Stahl, and still more for Varenka.
She saw that Kitty did not merely imitate Varenka in her
conduct, but unconsciously imitated her in her manner of
walking, of talking, of blinking her eyes. But later on the
princess noticed that, apart from this adoration, some kind
of serious spiritual change was taking place in her
daughter.
The princess saw that in the evenings Kitty read a
French testament that Madame Stahl had given her—a
thing she had never done before; that she avoided society
acquaintances and associated with the sick people who
were under Varenka’s protection, and especially one poor
family, that of a sick painter, Petrov. Kitty was
unmistakably proud of playing the part of a sister of mercy
in that family. All this was well enough, and the princess
had nothing to say against it, especially as Petrov’s wife
was a perfectly nice sort of woman, and that the German
princess, noticing Kitty’s devotion, praised her, calling her
an angel of consolation. All this would have been very
well, if there had been no exaggeration. But the princess
Anna Karenina
493 of 1759
saw that her daughter was rushing into extremes, and so
indeed she told her.
‘Il ne faut jamais rien outrer,’ she said to her.
Her daughter made her no reply, only in her heart she
thought that one could not talk about exaggeration where
Christianity was concerned. What exaggeration could
there be in the practice of a doctrine wherein one was
bidden to turn the other cheek when one was smitten, and
give one’s cloak if one’s coat were taken? But the princess
disliked this exaggeration, and disliked even more the fact
that she felt her daughter did not care to show her all her
heart. Kitty did in fact conceal her new views and feelings
from her mother. She concealed them not because she did
not respect or did not love her mother, but simply because
she was her mother. She would have revealed them to
anyone sooner than to her mother.
‘How is it Anna Pavlovna’s not been to see us for so
long?’ the princess said one day of Madame Petrova. ‘I’ve
asked her, but she seems put out about something.’
‘No, I’ve not noticed it, maman,’ said Kitty, flushing
hotly.
‘Is it long since you went to see them?’
‘We’re meaning to make an expedition to the
mountains tomorrow,’ answered Kitty,
Anna Karenina
494 of 1759
‘Well, you can go,’ answered the princess, gazing at her
daughter’s embarrassed face and trying to guess the cause
of her embarrassment.
That day Varenka came to dinner and told them that
Anna Pavlovna had changed her mind and given up the
expedition for the morrow. And the princess noticed again
that Kitty reddened.
‘Kitty, haven’t you had some misunderstanding with
the Petrovs?’ said the princess, when they were left alone.
‘Why has she given up sending the children and coming
to see us?’
Kitty answered that nothing had happened between
them, and that she could not tell why Anna Pavlovna
seemed displeased with her. Kitty answered perfectly truly.
She did not know the reason Anna Pavlovna had changed
to her, but she guessed it. She guessed at something which
she could not tell her mother, which she did not put into
words to herself. It was one of those things which one
knows but which one can never speak of even to oneself
so terrible and shameful would it be to be mistaken.
Again and again she went over in her memory all her
relations with the family. She remembered the simple
delight expressed on the round, good-humored face of
Anna Pavlovna at their meetings; she remembered their
Anna Karenina
495 of 1759
secret confabulations about the invalid, their plots to draw
him away from the work which was forbidden him, and
to get him out-of-doors; the devotion of the youngest
boy, who used to call her ‘my Kitty,’ and would not go to
bed without her. How nice it all was! Then she recalled
the thin, terribly thin figure of Petrov, with his long neck,
in his brown coat, his scant, curly hair, his questioning
blue eyes that were so terrible to Kitty at first, and his
painful attempts to seem hearty and lively in her presence.
She recalled the efforts she had made at first to overcome
the repugnance she felt for him, as for all consumptive
people, and the pains it had cost her to think of things to
say to him. She recalled the timid, softened look with
which he gazed at her, and the strange feeling of
compassion and awkwardness, and later of a sense of her
own goodness, which she had felt at it. How nice it all
was! But all that was at first. Now, a few days ago,
everything was suddenly spoiled. Anna Pavlovna had met
Kitty with affected cordiality, and had kept continual
watch on her and on her husband.
Could that touching pleasure he showed when she
came near be the cause of Anna Pavlovna’s coolness?
‘Yes,’ she mused, ‘there was something unnatural about
Anna Pavlovna, and utterly unlike her good nature, when
Anna Karenina
496 of 1759
she said angrily the day before yesterday: ‘There, he will
keep waiting for you; he wouldn’t drink his coffee
without you, though he’s grown so dreadfully weak.’ ‘
‘Yes, perhaps, too, she didn’t like it when I gave him
the rug. It was all so simple, but he took it so awkwardly,
and was so long thanking me, that I felt awkward too.
And then that portrait of me he did so well. And most of
all that look of confusion and tenderness! Yes, yes, that’s
it!’ Kitty repeated to herself with horror. ‘No, it can’t be,
it oughtn’t to be! He’s so much to be pitied!’ she said to
herself directly after.
This doubt poisoned the charm of her new life.
Anna Karenina
497 of 1759
Chapter 34
Before the end of the course of drinking the waters,
Prince Shtcherbatsky, who had gone on from Carlsbad to
Baden and Kissingen to Russian friends—to get a breath
of Russian air, as he said—came back to his wife and
daughter.
The views of the prince and of the princess on life
abroad were completely opposed. The princess thought
everything delightful, and in spite of her established
position in Russian society, she tried abroad to be like a
European fashionable lady, which she was not—for the
simple reason that she was a typical Russian gentlewoman;
and so she was affected, which did not altogether suit her.
The prince, on the contrary, thought everything foreign
detestable, got sick of European life, kept to his Russian
habits, and purposely tried to show himself abroad less
European than he was in reality.
The prince returned thinner, with the skin hanging in
loose bags on his cheeks, but in the most cheerful frame of
mind. His good humor was even greater when he saw
Kitty completely recovered. The news of Kitty’s friendship
with Madame Stahl and Varenka, and the reports the
Anna Karenina
498 of 1759
princess gave him of some kind of change she had noticed
in Kitty, troubled the prince and aroused his habitual
feeling of jealousy of everything that drew his daughter
away from him, and a dread that his daughter might have
got out of the reach of his influence into regions
inaccessible to him. But these unpleasant matters were all
drowned in the sea of kindliness and good humor which
was always within him, and more so than ever since his
course of Carlsbad waters.
The day after his arrival the prince, in his long
overcoat, with his Russian wrinkles and baggy cheeks
propped up by a starched collar, set off with his daughter
to the spring in the greatest good humor.
It was a lovely morning: the bright, cheerful houses
with their little gardens, the sight of the red-faced, redarmed, beer-drinking German waitresses, working away
merrily, did the heart good. But the nearer they got to the
springs the oftener they met sick people; and their
appearance seemed more pitiable than ever among the
everyday conditions of prosperous German life. Kitty was
no longer struck by this contrast. The bright sun, the
brilliant green of the foliage, the strains of the music were
for her the natural setting of all these familiar faces, with
their changes to greater emaciation or to convalescence,
Anna Karenina
499 of 1759
for which she watched. But to the prince the brightness
and gaiety of the June morning, and the sound of the
orchestra playing a gay waltz then in fashion, and above
all, the appearance of the healthy attendants, seemed
something unseemly and monstrous, in conjunction with
these slowly moving, dying figures gathered together from
all parts of Europe. In spite of his feeling of pride and, as it
were, of the return of youth, with his favorite daughter on
his arm, he felt awkward, and almost ashamed of his
vigorous step and his sturdy, stout limbs. He felt almost
like a man not dressed in a crowd.
‘Present me to your new friends,’ he said to his
daughter, squeezing her hand with his elbow. ‘I like even
your horrid Soden for making you so well again. Only it’s
melancholy, very melancholy here. Who’s that?’
Kitty mentioned the names of all the people they met,
with some of whom she was acquainted and some not. At
the entrance of the garden they met the blind lady,
Madame Berthe, with her guide, and the prince was
delighted to see the old Frenchwoman’s face light up
when she heard Kitty’s voice. She at once began talking to
him with French exaggerated politeness, applauding him
for having such a delightful daughter, extolling Kitty to
Anna Karenina
500 of 1759
the skies before her face, and calling her a treasure, a pearl,
and a consoling angel.
‘Well, she’s the second angel, then,’ said the prince,
smiling. ‘she calls Mademoiselle Varenka angel number
one.’
‘Oh! Mademoiselle Varenka, she’s a real angel, allez,’
Madame Berthe assented.
In the arcade they met Varenka herself. She was
walking rapidly towards them carrying an elegant red bag.
‘Here is papa come,’ Kitty said to her.
Varenka made—simply and naturally as she did
everything—a movement between a bow and curtsey, and
immediately began talking to the prince, without shyness,
naturally, as she talked to everyone.
‘Of course I know you; I know you very well,’ the
prince said to her with a smile, in which Kitty detected
with joy that her father liked her friend. ‘Where are you
off to in such haste?’
‘Maman’s here,’ she said, turning to Kitty. ‘She has not
slept all night, and the doctor advised her to go out. I’m
taking her her work.’
‘So that’s angel number one?’ said the prince when
Varenka had gone on.
Anna Karenina
501 of 1759
Kitty saw that her father had meant to make fun of
Varenka, but that he could not do it because he liked her.
‘Come, so we shall see all your friends,’ he went on,
‘even Madame Stahl, if she deigns to recognize me.’
‘Why, did you know her, papa?’ Kitty asked
apprehensively, catching the gleam of irony that kindled in
the prince’s eyes at the mention of Madame Stahl.
‘I used to know her husband, and her too a little,
before she’d joined the Pietists.’
‘What is a Pietist, papa?’ asked Kitty, dismayed to find
that what she prized so highly in Madame Stahl had a
name.
‘I don’t quite know myself. I only know that she thanks
God for everything, for every misfortune, and thanks God
too that her husband died. And that’s rather droll, as they
didn’t get on together.’
‘Who’s that? What a piteous face!’ he asked, noticing a
sick man of medium height sitting on a bench, wearing a
brown overcoat and white trousers that fell in strange folds
about his long, fleshless legs. This man lifted his straw hat,
showed his scanty curly hair and high forehead, painfully
reddened by the pressure of the hat.
‘That’s Petrov, an artist,’ answered Kitty, blushing.
‘And that’s his wife,’ she added, indicating Anna Pavlovna,
Anna Karenina
502 of 1759
who, as though on purpose, at the very instant they
approached walked away after a child that had run off
along a path.
‘Poor fellow! and what a nice face he has!’ said the
prince. ‘Why don’t you go up to him? He wanted to
speak to you.’
‘Well, let us go, then,’ said Kitty, turning round
resolutely. ‘How are you feeling today?’ she asked Petrov.
Petrov got up, leaning on his stick, and looked shyly at
the prince.
‘This is my daughter,’ said the prince. ‘Let me
introduce myself.’
The painter bowed and smiled, showing his strangely
dazzling white teeth.
‘We expected you yesterday, princess,’ he said to Kitty.
He staggered as he said this, and then repeated the motion,
trying to make it seem as if it had been intentional.
‘I meant to come, but Varenka said that Anna Pavlovna
sent word you were not going.’
‘Not going!’ said Petrov, blushing, and immediately
beginning to cough, and his eyes sought his wife. ‘Anita!
Anita!’ he said loudly, and the swollen veins stood out like
cords on his thin white neck.
Anna Pavlovna came up.
Anna Karenina
503 of 1759
‘So you sent word to the princess that we weren’t
going!’ he whispered to her angrily, losing his voice.
‘Good morning, princess,’ said Anna Pavlovna, with an
assumed smile utterly unlike her former manner. ‘Very
glad to make your acquaintance,’ she said to the prince.
‘You’ve long been expected, prince.’
‘What did you send word to the princess that we
weren’t going for?’ the artist whispered hoarsely once
more, still more angrily, obviously exasperated that his
voice failed him so that he could not give his words the
expression he would have liked to.
‘Oh, mercy on us! I thought we weren’t going,’ his
wife answered crossly.
‘What, when....’ He coughed and waved his hand. The
prince took off his hat and moved away with his daughter.
‘Ah! ah!’ he sighed deeply. ‘Oh, poor things!’
‘Yes, papa,’ answered Kitty. ‘And you must know
they’ve three children, no servant, and scarcely any means.
He gets something from the Academy,’ she went on
briskly, trying to drown the distress that the queer change
in Anna Pavlovna’s manner to her had aroused in her.
‘Oh, here’s Madame Stahl,’ said Kitty, indicating an
invalid carriage, where, propped on pillows, something in
gray and blue was lying under a sunshade. This was
Anna Karenina
504 of 1759
Madame Stahl. Behind her stood the gloomy, healthylooking German workman who pushed the carriage. Close
by was standing a flaxen-headed Swedish count, whom
Kitty knew by name. Several invalids were lingering near
the low carriage, staring at the lady as though she were
some curiosity.
The prince went up to her, and Kitty detected that
disconcerting gleam of irony in his eyes. He went up to
Madame Stahl, and addressed her with extreme courtesy
and affability in that excellent French that so few speak
nowadays.
‘I don’t know if you remember me, but I must recall
myself to thank you for your kindness to my daughter,’ he
said, taking off his hat and not putting it on again.
‘Prince Alexander Shtcherbatsky,’ said Madame Stahl,
lifting upon him her heavenly eyes, in which Kitty
discerned a look of annoyance. ‘Delighted! I have taken a
great fancy to your daughter.’
‘You are still in weak health?’
‘Yes; I’m used to it,’ said Madame Stahl, and she
introduced the prince to the Swedish count.
‘You are scarcely changed at all,’ the prince said to her.
‘It’s ten or eleven years since I had the honor of seeing
you.’
Anna Karenina
505 of 1759
‘Yes; God sends the cross and sends the strength to bear
it. Often one wonders what is the goal of this life?... The
other side!’ she said angrily to Varenka, who had
rearranged the rug over her feet not to her satisfaction.
‘To do good, probably,’ said the prince with a twinkle
in his eye.
‘That is not for us to judge,’ said Madame Stahl,
perceiving the shade of expression on the prince’s face. ‘So
you will send me that book, dear count? I’m very grateful
to you,’ she said to the young Swede.
‘Ah!’ cried the prince, catching sight of the Moscow
colonel standing near, and with a bow to Madame Stahl
he walked away with his daughter and the Moscow
colonel, who joined them.
‘That’s our aristocracy, prince!’ the Moscow colonel
said with ironical intention. He cherished a grudge against
Madame Stahl for not making his acquaintance.
‘She’s just the same,’ replied the prince.
‘Did you know her before her illness, prince—that’s to
say before she took to her bed?’
‘Yes. She took to her bed before my eyes,’ said the
prince.
‘They say it’s ten years since she has stood on her feet.’
Anna Karenina
506 of 1759
‘She doesn’t stand up because her legs are too short.
She’s a very bad figure.’
‘Papa, it’s not possible!’ cried Kitty.
‘That’s what wicked tongues say, my darling. And your
Varenka catches it too,’ he added. ‘Oh, these invalid
ladies!’
‘Oh, no, papa!’ Kitty objected warmly. ‘Varenka
worships her. And then she does so much good! Ask
anyone! Everyone knows her and Aline Stahl.’
‘Perhaps so,’ said the prince, squeezing her hand with
his elbow; ‘but it’s better when one does good so that you
may ask everyone and no one knows.’
Kitty did not answer, not because she had nothing to
say, but because she did not care to reveal her secret
thoughts even to her father. But, strange to say, although
she had so made up her mind not to be influenced by her
father’s views, not to let him into her inmost sanctuary,
she felt that the heavenly image of Madame Stahl, which
she had carried for a whole month in her heart, had
vanished, never to return, just as the fantastic figure made
up of some clothes thrown down at random vanishes
when one sees that it is only some garment lying there. All
that was left was a woman with short legs, who lay down
because she had a bad figure, and worried patient Varenka
Anna Karenina
507 of 1759
for not arranging her rug to her liking. And by no effort of
the imagination could Kitty bring back the former
Madame Stahl.
Anna Karenina
508 of 1759
Chapter 35
The prince communicated his good humor to his own
family and his friends, and even to the German landlord in
whose rooms the Shtcherbatskys were staying.
On coming back with Kitty from the springs, the
prince, who had asked the colonel, and Marya
Yevgenyevna, and Varenka all to come and have coffee
with them, gave orders for a table and chairs to be taken
into the garden under the chestnut tree, and lunch to be
laid there. The landlord and the servants, too, grew brisker
under the influence of his good spirits. They knew his
open-handedness; and half an hour later the invalid doctor
from Hamburg, who lived on the top floor, looked
enviously out of the window at the merry party of healthy
Russians assembled under the chestnut tree. In the
trembling circles of shadow cast by the leaves, at a table,
covered with a white cloth, and set with coffeepot, breadand-butter, cheese, and cold game, sat the princess in a
high cap with lilac ribbons, distributing cups and breadand-butter. At the other end sat the prince, eating heartily,
and talking loudly and merrily. The prince had spread out
near him his purchases, carved boxes, and knick-knacks,
Anna Karenina
509 of 1759
paper-knives of all sorts, of which he bought a heap at
every watering-place, and bestowed them upon everyone,
including Lieschen, the servant girl, and the landlord, with
whom he jested in his comically bad German, assuring
him that it was not the water had cured Kitty, but his
splendid cookery, especially his plum soup. The princess
laughed at her husband for his Russian ways, but she was
more lively and good-humored than she had been all the
while she had been at the waters. The colonel smiled, as
he always did, at the prince’s jokes, but as far as regards
Europe, of which he believed himself to be making a
careful study, he took the princess’s side. The simplehearted Marya Yevgenyevna simply roared with laughter
at everything absurd the prince said, and his jokes made
Varenka helpless with feeble but infectious laughter,
which was something Kitty had never seen before.
Kitty was glad of all this, but she could not be lighthearted. she could not solve the problem her father had
unconsciously set her by his goodhumored view of her
friends, and of the life that had so attracted her. To this
doubt there was joined the change in her relations with
the Petrovs, which had been so conspicuously and
unpleasantly marked that morning. Everyone was good
humored, but Kitty could not feel good humored, and this
Anna Karenina
510 of 1759
increased her distress. She felt a feeling such as she had
known in childhood, when she had been shut in her room
as a punishment, and had heard her sisters’ merry laughter
outside.
‘Well, but what did you buy this mass of things for?’
said the princess, smiling, and handing her husband a cup
of coffee.
‘One goes for a walk, one looks in a shop, and they ask
you to buy. ‘Erlaucht, Durchlaucht?’ Directly they say
‘Durchlaucht,’ I can’t hold out. I lose ten thalers.’
‘It’s simply from boredom,’ said the princess.
‘Of course it is. Such boredom, my dear, that one
doesn’t know what to do with oneself.’
‘How can you be bored, prince? There’s so much that’s
interesting now in Germany,’ said Marya Yevgenyevna.
‘But I know everything that’s interesting: the plum
soup I know, and the pea sausages I know. I know
everything.’
‘No, you may say what you like, prince, there’s the
interest of their institutions,’ said the colonel.
‘But what is there interesting about it? They’re all as
pleased as brass halfpence. They’ve conquered everybody,
and why am I to be pleased at that? I haven’t conquered
anyone; and I’m obliged to take off my own boots, yes,
Anna Karenina
511 of 1759
and put them away too; in the morning, get up and dress
at once, and go to the dining room to drink bad tea! How
different it is at home! You get up in no haste, you get
cross, grumble a little, and come round again. You’ve time
to think things over, and no hurry.’
‘But time’s money, you forget that,’ said the colonel.
‘Time, indeed, that depends! Why, there’s time one
would give a month of for sixpence, and time you
wouldn’t give half an hour of for any money.
Isn&#x2019;t that so, Katinka? What is it? why are you so
depressed?’
‘I’m not depressed.’
‘Where are you off to? Stay a little longer,’ he said to
Varenka.
‘I must be going home,’ said Varenka, getting up, and
again she went off into a giggle. When she had recovered,
she said good-bye, and went into the house to get her hat.
Kitty followed her. Even Varenka struck her as
different. She was not worse, but different from what she
had fancied her before.
‘Oh, dear! it’s a long while since I’ve laughed so much!’
said Varenka, gathering up her parasol and her bag. ‘How
nice he is, your father!’
Kitty did not speak.
Anna Karenina
512 of 1759
‘When shall I see you again?’ asked Varenka.
‘Mamma meant to go and see the Petrovs. Won’t you
be there?’ said Kitty, to try Varenka.
‘Yes,’ answered Varenka. ‘They’re getting ready to go
away, so I promised to help them pack.’
‘Well, I’ll come too, then.’
‘No, why should you?’
‘Why not? why not? why not?’ said Kitty, opening her
eyes wide, and clutching at Varenka’s parasol, so as not to
let her go. ‘No, wait a minute; why not?’
‘Oh, nothing; your father has come, and besides, they
will feel awkward at your helping.’
‘No, tell me why you don’t want me to be often at the
Petrovs’. You don’t want me to—why not?’
‘I didn’t say that,’ said Varenka quietly.
‘No, please tell me!’
‘Tell you everything?’ asked Varenka.
‘Everything, everything!’ Kitty assented.
‘Well, there’s really nothing of any consequence; only
that Mihail Alexeyevitch’ (that was the artist’s name) ‘had
meant to leave earlier, and now he doesn’t want to go
away,’ said Varenka, smiling.
‘Well, well!’ Kitty urged impatiently, looking darkly at
Varenka.
Anna Karenina
513 of 1759
‘Well, and for some reason Anna Pavlovna told him
that he didn’t want to go because you are here. Of course,
that was nonsense; but there was a dispute over it—over
you. You know how irritable these sick people are.’
Kitty, scowling more than ever, kept silent, and
Varenka went on speaking alone, trying to soften or
soothe her, and seeing a storm coming—she did not know
whether of tears or of words.
‘So you’d better not go.... You understand; you won’t
be offended?..’
‘And it serves me right! And it serves me right!’ Kitty
cried quickly, snatching the parasol out of Varenka’s hand,
and looking past her friend’s face.
Varenka felt inclined to smile, looking at her childish
fury, but she was afraid of wounding her.
‘How does it serve you right? I don’t understand,’ she
said.
‘It serves me right, because it was all sham; because it
was all done on purpose, and not from the heart. What
business had I to interfere with outsiders? And so it’s come
about that I’m a cause of quarrel, and that I’ve done what
nobody asked me to do. Because it was all a sham! a sham!
a sham! . . .’
‘A sham! with what object?’ said Varenka gently.
Anna Karenina
514 of 1759
‘Oh, it’s so idiotic! so hateful! There was no need
whatever for me.... Nothing but sham!’ she said, opening
and shutting the parasol.
‘But with what object?’
‘To seem better to people, to myself, to God; to
deceive everyone. No! now I won’t descend to that. I’ll
be bad; but anyway not a liar, a cheat.’
‘But who is a cheat?’ said Varenka reproachfully. ‘You
speak as if..’
But Kitty was in one of her gusts of fury, and she
would not let her finish.
‘I don’t talk about you, not about you at all. You’re
perfection. Yes, yes, I know you’re all perfection; but
what am I to do if I’m bad? This would never have been if
I weren’t bad. So let me be what I am. I won’t be a sham.
What have I to do with Anna Pavlovna? Let them go their
way, and me go mine. I can’t be different.... And yet it’s
not that, it’s not that.’
‘What is not that?’ asked Varenka in bewilderment.
‘Everything. I can’t act except from the heart, and you
act from principle. I liked you simply, but you most likely
only wanted to save me, to improve me.’
‘You are unjust,’ said Varenka.
Anna Karenina
515 of 1759
‘But I’m not speaking of other people, I’m speaking of
myself.’
‘Kitty,’ they heard her mother’s voice, ‘come here,
show papa your necklace.’
Kitty, with a haughty air, without making peace with
her friend, took the necklace in a little box from the table
and went to her mother.
‘What’s the matter? Why are you so red?’ her mother
and father said to her with one voice.
‘Nothing,’ she answered. ‘I’ll be back directly,’ and she
ran back.
‘She’s still here,’ she thought. ‘What am I to say to her?
Oh, dear! what have I done, what have I said? Why was I
rude to her? What am I to do? What am I to say to her?’
thought Kitty, and she stopped in the doorway.
Varenka in her hat and with the parasol in her hands
was sitting at the table examining the spring which Kitty
had broken. She lifted her head.
‘Varenka, forgive me, do forgive me,’ whispered Kitty,
going up to her. ‘I don’t remember what I said. I..’
‘I really didn’t mean to hurt you,’ said Varenka,
smiling.
Peace was made. But with her father’s coming all the
world in which she had been living was transformed for
Anna Karenina
516 of 1759
Kitty. She did not give up everything she had learned, but
she became aware that she had deceived herself in
supposing she could be what she wanted to be. Her eyes
were, it seemed, opened; she felt all the difficulty of
maintaining herself without hypocrisy and self-conceit on
the pinnacle to which she had wished to mount.
Moreover, she became aware of all the dreariness of the
world of sorrow, of sick and dying people, in which she
had been living. The efforts she had made to like it
seemed to her intolerable, and she felt a longing to get
back quickly into the fresh air, to Russia, to Ergushovo,
where, as she knew from letters, her sister Dolly had
already gone with her children.
But her affection for Varenka did not wane. As she said
good-bye, Kitty begged her to come to them in Russia.
‘I’ll come when you get married,’ said Varenka.
‘I shall never marry.’
‘Well, then, I shall never come.’
‘Well, then, I shall be married simply for that. Mind
now, remember your promise,’ said Kitty.
The doctor’s prediction was fulfilled. Kitty returned
home to Russia cured. She was not so gay and thoughtless
as before, but she was serene. Her Moscow troubles had
become a memory to her.
Anna Karenina
517 of 1759
PART THREE
Anna Karenina
518 of 1759
Chapter 1
Sergey Ivanovitch Koznishev wanted a rest from
mental work, and instead of going abroad as he usually
did, he came towards the end of May to stay in the
country with his brother. In his judgment the best sort of
life was a country life. He had come now to enjoy such a
life at his brother’s. Konstantin Levin was very glad to
have him, especially as he did not expect his brother
Nikolay that summer. But in spite of his affection and
respect for Sergey Ivanovitch, Konstantin Levin was
uncomfortable with his brother in the country. It made
him uncomfortable, and it positively annoyed him to see
his brother’s attitude to the country. To Konstantin Levin
the country was the background of life, that is of pleasures,
endeavors, labor. To Sergey Ivanovitch the country meant
on one hand rest from work, on the other a valuable
antidote to the corrupt influences of town, which he took
with satisfaction and a sense of its utility. To Konstantin
Levin the country was good first because it afforded a field
for labor, of the usefulness of which there could be no
doubt. To Sergey Ivanovitch the country was particularly
good, because there it was possible and fitting to do
nothing. Moreover, Sergey Ivanovitch’s attitude to the
Anna Karenina
519 of 1759
peasants rather piqued Konstantin. Sergey Ivanovitch used
to say that he knew and liked the peasantry, and he often
talked to the peasants, which he knew how to do without
affectation or condescension, and from every such
conversation he would deduce general conclusions in
favor of the peasantry and in confirmation of his knowing
them. Konstantin Levin did not like such an attitude to
the peasants. To Konstantin the peasant was simply the
chief partner in their common labor, and in spite of all the
respect and the love, almost like that of kinship, he had for
the peasant— sucked in probably, as he said himself, with
the milk of his peasant nurse—still as a fellow-worker with
him, while sometimes enthusiastic over the vigor,
gentleness, and justice of these men, he was very often,
when their common labors called for other qualities,
exasperated with the peasant for his carelessness, lack of
method, drunkenness, and lying. If he had been asked
whether he liked or didn’t like the peasants, Konstantin
Levin would have been absolutely at a loss what to reply.
He liked and did not like the peasants, just as he liked and
did not like men in general. Of course, being a goodhearted man, he liked men rather than he disliked them,
and so too with the peasants. But like or dislike ‘the
people’ as something apart he could not, not only because
Anna Karenina
520 of 1759
he lived with ‘the people,’ and all his interests were bound
up with theirs, but also because he regarded himself as a
part of ‘the people,’ did not see any special qualities or
failings distinguishing himself and ‘the people,’ and could
not contrast himself with them. Moreover, although he
had lived so long in the closest relations with the peasants,
as farmer and arbitrator, and what was more, as adviser
(the peasants trusted him, and for thirty miles round they
would come to ask his advice), he had no definite views of
‘the people,’ and would have been as much at a loss to
answer the question whether he knew ‘the people’ as the
question whether he liked them. For him to say he knew
the peasantry would have been the same as to say he knew
men. He was continually watching and getting to know
people of all sorts, and among them peasants, whom he
regarded as good and interesting people, and he was
continually observing new points in them, altering his
former views of them and forming new ones. With Sergey
Ivanovitch it was quite the contrary. Just as he liked and
praised a country life in comparison with the life he did
not like, so too he liked the peasantry in contradistinction
to the class of men he did not like, and so too he knew the
peasantry as something distinct from and opposed to men
generally. In his methodical brain there were distinctly
Anna Karenina
521 of 1759
formulated certain aspects of peasant life, deduced partly
from that life itself, but chiefly from contrast with other
modes of life. He never changed his opinion of the
peasantry and his sympathetic attitude towards them.
In the discussions that arose between the brothers on
their views of the peasantry, Sergey Ivanovitch always got
the better of his brother, precisely because Sergey
Ivanovitch had definite ideas about the peasant—his
character, his qualities, and his tastes. Konstantin Levin had
no definite and unalterable idea on the subject, and so in
their arguments Konstantin was readily convicted of
contradicting himself.
I Sergey Ivanovitch’s eyes his younger brother was a
capital fellow, with his heart in the right place (as he
expressed it in French), but with a mind which, though
fairly quick, was too much influenced by the impressions
of the moment, and consequently filled with
contradictions. With all the condescension of an elder
brother he sometimes explained to him the true import of
things, but he derived little satisfaction from arguing with
him because he got the better of him too easily.
Konstantin Levin regarded his brother as a man of
immense intellect and culture, as generous in the highest
sense of the word, and possessed of a special faculty for
Anna Karenina
522 of 1759
working for the public good. But in the depths of his
heart, the older he became, and the more intimately he
knew his brother, the more and more frequently the
thought struck him that this faculty of working for the
public good, of which he felt himself utterly devoid, was
possibly not so much a quality as a lack of something —
not a lack of good, honest, noble desires and tastes, but a
lack of vital force, of what is called heart, of that impulse
which drives a man to choose someone out of the
innumerable paths of life, and to care only for that one.
The better he knew his brother, the more he noticed that
Sergey Ivanovitch, and many other people who worked
for the public welfare, were not led by an impulse of the
heart to care for the public good, but reasoned from
intellectual considerations that it was a right thing to take
interest in public affairs, and consequently took interest in
them. Levin was confirmed in this generalization by
observing that his brother did not take questions affecting
the public welfare or the question of the immortality of
the soul a bit more to heart than he did chess problems, or
the ingenious construction of a new machine.
Besides this, Konstantin Levin was not at his ease with
his brother, because in summer in the country Levin was
continually busy with work on the land, and the long
Anna Karenina
523 of 1759
summer day was not long enough for him to get through
all he had to do, while Sergey Ivanovitch was taking a
holiday. But though he was taking a holiday now, that is
to say, he was doing no writing, he was so used to
intellectual activity that he liked to put into concise and
eloquent shape the ideas that occurred to him, and liked to
have someone to listen to him. His most usual and natural
listener was his brother. And so in spite of the friendliness
and directness of their relations, Konstantin felt an
awkwardness in leaving him alone. Sergey Ivanovitch
liked to stretch himself on the grass in the sun, and to lie
so, basking and chatting lazily.
‘You wouldn’t believe,’ he would say to his brother,
‘what a pleasure this rural laziness is to me. Not an idea in
one’s brain, as empty as a drum!’
But Konstantin Levin found it dull sitting and listening
to him, especially when he knew that while he was away
they would be carting dung onto the fields not ploughed
ready for it, and heaping it all up anyhow; and would not
screw the shares in the ploughs, but would let them come
off and then say that the new ploughs were a silly
invention, and there was nothing like the old Andreevna
plough, and so on.
Anna Karenina
524 of 1759
‘Come, you’ve done enough trudging about in the
heat,’ Sergey Ivanovitch would say to him.
‘No, I must just run round to the counting-house for a
minute,’ Levin would answer, and he would run off to the
fields.
Anna Karenina
525 of 1759
Chapter 2
Early in June it happened that Agafea Mihalovna, the
old nurse and housekeeper, in carrying to the cellar a jar of
mushrooms she had just pickled, slipped, fell, and sprained
her wrist. The district doctor, a talkative young medical
student, who had just finished his studies, came to see her.
He examined the wrist, said it was not broken, was
delighted at a chance of talking to the celebrated Sergey
Ivanovitch Koznishev, and to show his advanced views of
things told him all the scandal of the district, complaining
of the poor state into which the district council had fallen.
Sergey Ivanovitch listened attentively, asked him
questions, and, roused by a new listener, he talked
fluently, uttered a few keen and weighty observations,
respectfully appreciated by the young doctor, and was
soon in that eager frame of mind his brother knew so well,
which always, with him, followed a brilliant and eager
conversation. After the departure of the doctor, he wanted
to go with a fishing rod to the river. Sergey Ivanovitch
was fond of angling, and was, it seemed, proud of being
able to care for such a stupid occupation.
Anna Karenina
526 of 1759
Konstantin Levin, whose presence was needed in the
plough land and meadows, had come to take his brother
in the trap.
It was that time of the year, the turning-point of
summer, when the crops of the present year are a
certainty, when one begins to think of the sowing for next
year, and the mowing is at hand; when the rye is all in ear,
though its ears are still light, not yet full, and it waves in
gray-green billows in the wind; when the green oats, with
tufts of yellow grass scattered here and there among it,
droop irregularly over the late-sown fields; when the early
buckwheat is already out and hiding the ground; when the
fallow lands, trodden hard as stone by the cattle, are half
ploughed over, with paths left untouched by the plough;
when from the dry dung-heaps carted onto the fields there
comes at sunset a smell of manure mixed with meadowsweet, and on the low-lying lands the riverside meadows
are a thick sea of grass waiting for the mowing, with
blackened heaps of the stalks of sorrel among it.
It was the time when there comes a brief pause in the
toil of the fields before the beginning of the labors of
harvest—every year recurring, every year straining every
nerve of the peasants. The crop was a splendid one, and
Anna Karenina
527 of 1759
bright, hot summer days had set in with short, dewy
nights.
The brothers had to drive through the woods to reach
the meadows. Sergey Ivanovitch was all the while
admiring the beauty of the woods, which were a tangled
mass of leaves, pointing out to his brother now an old lime
tree on the point of flowering, dark on the shady side, and
brightly spotted with yellow stipules, now the young
shoots of this year’s saplings brilliant with emerald.
Konstantin Levin did not like talking and hearing about
the beauty of nature. Words for him took away the beauty
of what he saw. He assented to what his brother said, but
he could not help beginning to think of other things.
When they came out of the woods, all his attention was
engrossed by the view of the fallow land on the upland, in
parts yellow with grass, in parts trampled and checkered
with furrows, in parts dotted with ridges of dung, and in
parts even ploughed. A string of carts was moving across
it. Levin counted the carts, and was pleased that all that
were wanted had been brought, and at the sight of the
meadows his thoughts passed to the mowing. He always
felt something special moving him to the quick at the haymaking. On reaching the meadow Levin stopped the
horse.
Anna Karenina
528 of 1759
The morning dew was still lying on the thick
undergrowth of the grass, and that he might not get his
feet wet, Sergey Ivanovitch asked his brother to drive him
in the trap up to the willow tree from which the carp was
caught. Sorry as Konstantin Levin was to crush down his
mowing grass, he drove him into the meadow. The high
grass softly turned about the wheels and the horse’s legs,
leaving its seeds clinging to the wet axles and spokes of the
wheels. His brother seated himself under a bush, arranging
his tackle, while Levin led the horse away, fastened him
up, and walked into the vast gray-green sea of grass
unstirred by the wind. The silky grass with its ripe seeds
came almost to his waist in the dampest spots.
Crossing the meadow, Konstantin Levin came out onto
the road, and met an old man with a swollen eye, carrying
a skep on his shoulder.
‘What? taken a stray swarm, Fomitch?’ he asked.
‘No, indeed, Konstantin Mitritch! All we can do to
keep our own! This is the second swarm that has flown
away.... Luckily the lads caught them. They were
ploughing your field. They unyoked the horses and
galloped after them.’
‘Well, what do you say, Fomitch—start mowing or
wait a bit?’
Anna Karenina
529 of 1759
‘Eh, well. Our way’s to wait till St. Peter’s Day. But
you always mow sooner. Well, to be sure, please God, the
hay’s good. There’ll be plenty for the beasts.’
‘What do you think about the weather?’
‘That’s in God’s hands. Maybe it will be fine.’
Levin went up to his brother.
Sergey Ivanovitch had caught nothing, but he was not
bored, and seemed in the most cheerful frame of mind.
Levin saw that, stimulated by his conversation with the
doctor, he wanted to talk. Levin, on the other hand,
would have liked to get home as soon as possible to give
orders about getting together the mowers for next day,
and to set at rest his doubts about the mowing, which
greatly absorbed him.
‘Well, let’s be going,’ he said.
‘Why be in such a hurry? Let’s stay a little. But how
wet you are! Even though one catches nothing, it’s nice.
That’s the best thing about every part of sport, that one
has to do with nature. How exquisite this steely water is!’
said Sergey Ivanovitch. ‘These riverside banks always
remind me of the riddle—do you know it? ‘The grass says
to the water: we quiver and we quiver.’’
‘I don’t know the riddle,’ answered Levin wearily.
Anna Karenina
530 of 1759
Chapter 3
‘Do you know I’ve been thinking about you,’ said
Sergey Ivanovitch. ‘It’s beyond everything what’s being
done in the district, according to what this doctor tells me.
He’s a very intelligent fellow. And as I’ve told you before,
I tell you again: it’s not right for you not to go to the
meetings, and altogether to keep out of the district
business. If decent people won’t go into it, of course it’s
bound to go all wrong. We pay the money, and it all goes
in salaries, and there are no schools, nor district nurses, nor
midwives, nor drugstores— nothing.’
‘Well, I did try, you know,’ Levin said slowly and
unwillingly. ‘I can’t! and so there’s no help for it.’
‘But why can’t you? I must own I can’t make it out.
Idifference, incapacity—I won’t admit; surely it’s not
simply laziness?’
‘None of those things. I’ve tried, and I see I can do
nothing,’ said Levin.
He had hardly grasped what his brother was saying.
Looking towards the plough land across the river, he made
out something black, but he could not distinguish whether
it was a horse or the bailiff on horseback.
Anna Karenina
531 of 1759
‘Why is it you can do nothing? You made an attempt
and didn’t succeed, as you think, and you give in. How
can you have so little self-respect?’
‘Self-respect!’ said Levin, stung to the quick by his
brother’s words; ‘I don’t understand. If they’d told me at
college that other people understood the integral calculus,
and I didn’t, then pride would have come in. But in this
case one wants first to be convinced that one has certain
qualifications for this sort of business, and especially that all
this business is of great importance.’
‘What! do you mean to say it’s not of importance?’ said
Sergey Ivanovitch, stung to the quick too at his brother’s
considering anything of no importance that interested
him, and still more at his obviously paying little attention
to what he was saying.
‘I don’t think it important; it does not take hold of me,
I can’t help it,’ answered Levin, making out that what he
saw was the bailiff, and that the bailiff seemed to be letting
the peasants go off the ploughed land. They were turning
the plough over. ‘Can they have finished ploughing?’ he
wondered.
‘Come, really though,’ said the elder brother, with a
frown on his handsome, clever face, ‘there’s a limit to
everything. It’s very well to be original and genuine, and
Anna Karenina
532 of 1759
to dislike everything conventional—I know all about that;
but really, what you’re saying either has no meaning, or it
has a very wrong meaning. How can you think it a matter
of no importance whether the peasant, whom you love as
you assert..’
‘I never did assert it,’ thought Konstantin Levin.
‘...dies without help? The ignorant peasant-women
starve the children, and the people stagnate in darkness,
and are helpless in the hands of every village clerk, while
you have at your disposal a means of helping them, and
don’t help them because to your mind it’s of no
importance.’
And Sergey Ivanovitch put before him the alternative:
either you are so undeveloped that you can’t see all that
you can do, or you won’t sacrifice your ease, your vanity,
or whatever it is, to do it.
Konstantin Levin felt that there was no course open to
him but to submit, or to confess to a lack of zeal for the
public good. And this mortified him and hurt his feelings.
‘It’s both,’ he said resolutely: ‘I don’t see that it was
possible..’
‘What! was it impossible, if the money were properly
laid out, to provide medical aid?’
Anna Karenina
533 of 1759
‘Impossible, as it seems to me.... For the three thousand
square miles of our district, what with our thaws, and the
storms, and the work in the fields, I don’t see how it is
possible to provide medical aid all over. And besides, I
don’t believe in medicine.’
‘Oh, well, that’s unfair...I can quote to you thousands
of instances.... But the schools, anyway.’
‘Why have schools?’
‘What do you mean? Can there be two opinions of the
advantage of education? If it’s a good thing for you, it’s a
good thing for everyone.’
Konstantin Levin felt himself morally pinned against a
wall, and so he got hot, and unconsciously blurted out the
chief cause of his indifference to public business.
‘Perhaps it may all be very good; but why should I
worry myself about establishing dispensaries which I shall
never make use of, and schools to which I shall never send
my children, to which even the peasants don’t want to
send their children, and to which I’ve no very firm faith
that they ought to send them?’ said he.
Sergey Ivanovitch was for a minute surprised at this
unexpected view of the subject; but he promptly made a
new plan of attack. He was silent for a little, drew out a
hook, threw it in again, and turned to his brother smiling.
Anna Karenina
534 of 1759
‘Come, now.... In the first place, the dispensary is
needed. We ourselves sent for the district doctor for
Agafea Mihalovna.’
‘Oh, well, but I fancy her wrist will never be straight
again.’
‘That remains to be proved.... Next, the peasant who
can read and write is as a workman of more use and value
to you.’
‘No, you can ask anyone you like,’ Konstantin Levin
answered with decision, ‘the man that can read and write
is much inferior as a workman. And mending the
highroads is an impossibility; and as soon as they put up
bridges they’re stolen.’
‘Still, that’s not the point,’ said Sergey Ivanovitch,
frowning. He disliked contradiction, and still more,
arguments that were continually skipping from one thing
to another, introducing new and disconnected points, so
that there was no knowing to which to reply. ‘Do you
admit that education is a benefit for the people?’
‘Yes, I admit it,’ said Levin without thinking, and he
was conscious immediately that he had said what he did
not think. He felt that if he admitted that, it would be
proved that he had been talking meaningless rubbish. How
it would be proved he could not tell, but he knew that
Anna Karenina
535 of 1759
this would inevitably be logically proved to him, and he
awaited the proofs.
The argument turned out to be far simpler than he had
expected.
‘If you admit that it is a benefit,’ said Sergey
Ivanovitch, ‘then, as an honest man, you cannot help
caring about it and sympathizing with the movement, and
so wishing to work for it.’
‘But I still do not admit this movement to be just,’ said
Konstantin Levin, reddening a little.
‘What! But you said just now..’
‘That’s to say, I don’t admit it’s being either good or
possible.’
‘That you can’t tell without making the trial.’
‘Well, supposing that’s so,’ said Levin, though he did
not suppose so at all, ‘supposing that is so, still I don’t see,
all the same, what I’m to worry myself about it for.’
‘How so?’
‘No; since we are talking, explain it to me from the
philosophical point of view,’ said Levin.
‘I can’t see where philosophy comes in,’ said Sergey
Ivanovitch, in a tone, Levin fancied, as though he did not
admit his brother’s right to talk about philosophy. And
that irritated Levin.
Anna Karenina
536 of 1759
‘I’ll tell you, then,’ he said with heat, ‘I imagine the
mainspring of all our actions is, after all, self-interest. Now
in the local institutions I, as a nobleman, see nothing that
could conduce to my prosperity, and the roads are not
better and could not be better; my horses carry me well
enough over bad ones. Doctors and dispensaries are no use
to me. An arbitrator of disputes is no use to me. I never
appeal to him, and never shall appeal to him. The schools
are no good to me, but positively harmful, as I told you.
For me the district institutions simply mean the liability to
pay fourpence halfpenny for every three acres, to drive
into the town, sleep with bugs, and listen to all sorts of
idiocy and loathsomeness, and self-interest offers me no
inducement.’
‘Excuse me,’ Sergey Ivanovitch interposed with a smile,
‘self-interest did not induce us to work for the
emancipation of the serfs, but we did work for it.’
‘No!’ Konstantin Levin broke in with still greater heat;
‘the emancipation of the serfs was a different matter. There
self-interest did come in. One longed to throw off that
yoke that crushed us, all decent people among us. But to
be a town councilor and discuss how many dustmen are
needed, and how chimneys shall be constructed in the
town in which I don’t live—to serve on a jury and try a
Anna Karenina
537 of 1759
peasant who’s stolen a flitch of bacon, and listen for six
hours at a stretch to all sorts of jabber from the counsel for
the defense and the prosecution, and the president crossexamining my old half-witted Alioshka, ‘Do you admit,
prisoner in the dock, the fact of the removal of the
bacon?’ ‘Eh?’’
Konstantin Levin had warmed to his subject, and began
mimicking the president and the half-witted Alioshka: it
seemed to him that it was all to the point.
But Sergey Ivanovitch shrugged his shoulders.
‘Well, what do you mean to say, then?’
‘I simply mean to say that those rights that touch
me...my interest, I shall always defend to the best of my
ability; that when they made raids on us students, and the
police read our letters, I was ready to defend those rights
to the utmost, to defend my rights to education and
freedom. I can understand compulsory military service,
which affects my children, my brothers, and myself, I am
ready to deliberate on what concerns me; but deliberating
on how to spend forty thousand roubles of district council
money, or judging the half-witted Alioshka—I don’t
understand, and I can’t do it.’
Konstantin Levin spoke as though the floodgates of his
speech had burst open. Sergey Ivanovitch smiled.
Anna Karenina
538 of 1759
‘But tomorrow it’ll be your turn to be tried; would it
have suited your tastes better to be tried in the old
criminal tribunal?’
‘I’m not going to be tried. I shan’t murder anybody,
and I’ve no need of it. Well, I tell you what,’ he went on,
flying off again to a subject quite beside the point, ‘our
district self-government and all the rest of it—it’s just like
the birch branches we stick in the ground on Trinity Day,
for instance, to look like a copse which has grown up of
itself in Europe, and I can’t gush over these birch branches
and believe in them.’
Sergey Ivanovitch merely shrugged his shoulders, as
though to express his wonder how the birch branches had
come into their argument at that point, though he did
really understand at once what his brother meant.
‘Excuse me, but you know one really can’t argue in
that way,’ he observed.
But Konstantin Levin wanted to justify himself for the
failing, of which he was conscious, of lack of zeal for the
public welfare, and he went on.
‘I imagine,’ he said, ‘that no sort of activity is likely to
be lasting if it is not founded on self-interest, that’s a
universal principle, a philosophical principle,’ he said,
repeating the word ‘philosophical’ with determination, as
Anna Karenina
539 of 1759
though wishing to show that he had as much right as any
one else to talk of philosophy.
Sergey Ivanovitch smiled. ‘He too has a philosophy of
his own at the service of his natural tendencies,’ he
thought.
‘Come, you’d better let philosophy alone,’ he said.
‘The chief problem of the philosophy of all ages consists
just in finding the indispensable connection which exists
between individual and social interests. But that’s not to
the point; what is to the point is a correction I must make
in your comparison. The birches are not simply stuck in,
but some are sown and some are planted, and one must
deal carefully with them. It’s only those peoples that have
an intuitive sense of what’s of importance and significance
in their institutions, and know how to value them, that
have a future before them—it’s only those peoples that
one can truly call historical.’
And Sergey Ivanovitch carried the subject into the
regions of philosophical history where Konstantin Levin
could not follow him, and showed him all the
incorrectness of his view.
‘As for your dislike of it, excuse my saying so, that’s
simply our Russian sloth and old serf-owner’s ways, and
Anna Karenina
540 of 1759
I’m convinced that in you it’s a temporary error and will
pass.’
Konstantin was silent. He felt himself vanquished on all
sides, but he felt at the same time that what he wanted to
say was unintelligible to his brother. Only he could not
make up his mind whether it was unintelligible because he
was not capable of expressing his meaning clearly, or
because his brother would not or could not understand
him. But he did not pursue the speculation, and without
replying, he fell to musing on a quite different and
personal matter.
Sergey Ivanovitch wound up the last line, untied the
horse, and they drove off.
Anna Karenina
541 of 1759
Chapter 4
The personal matter that absorbed Levin during his
conversation with his brother was this. Once in a previous
year he had gone to look at the mowing, and being made
very angry by the bailiff he had recourse to his favorite
means for regaining his temper,— he took a scythe from a
peasant and began mowing.
He liked the work so much that he had several times
tried his hand at mowing since. He had cut the whole of
the meadow in front of his house, and this year ever since
the early spring he had cherished a plan for mowing for
whole days together with the peasants. Ever since his
brother’s arrival, he had been in doubt whether to mow or
not. He was loath to leave his brother alone all day long,
and he was afraid his brother would laugh at him about it.
But as he drove into the meadow, and recalled the
sensations of mowing, he came near deciding that he
would go mowing. After the irritating discussion with his
brother, he pondered over this intention again.
‘I must have physical exercise, or my temper’ll certainly
be ruined,’ he thought, and he determined he would go
Anna Karenina
542 of 1759
mowing, however awkward he might feel about it with
his brother or the peasants.
Towards evening Konstantin Levin went to his
counting house, gave directions as to the work to be done,
and sent about the village to summon the mowers for the
morrow, to cut the hay in Kalinov meadow, the largest
and best of his grass lands.
‘And send my scythe, please, to Tit, for him to set it,
and bring it round tomorrow. I shall maybe do some
mowing myself too,’ he said trying not to be embarrassed.
The bailiff smiled and said: ‘Yes, sir.’
At tea the same evening Levin said to his brother:
‘I fancy the fine weather will last. Tomorrow I shall
start mowing.’
‘I’m so fond of that form of field labor,’ said Sergey
Ivanovitch.
‘I’m awfully fond of it. I sometimes mow myself with
the peasants, and tomorrow I want to try mowing the
whole day.’
Sergey Ivanovitch lifted his head, and looked with
interest at his brother.
‘How do you mean? Just like one of the peasants, all
day long?’
‘Yes, it’s very pleasant,’ said Levin.
Anna Karenina
543 of 1759
‘It’s splendid as exercise, only you’ll hardly be able to
stand it,’ said Sergey Ivanovitch, without a shade of irony.
‘I’ve tried it. It’s hard work at first, but you get into it.
I dare say I shall manage to keep it up..’
‘Really! what an idea! But tell me, how do the peasants
look at it? I suppose they laugh in their sleeves at their
master’s being such a queer fish?’
‘No, I don’t think so; but it’s so delightful, and at the
same time such hard work, that one has no time to think
about it.’
‘But how will you do about dining with them? To
send you a bottle of Lafitte and roast turkey out there
would be a little awkward.’
‘No, I’ll simply come home at the time of their
noonday rest.’
Next morning Konstantin Levin got up earlier than
usual, but he was detained giving directions on the farm,
and when he reached the mowing grass the mowers were
already at their second row.
From the uplands he could get a view of the shaded cut
part of the meadow below, with its grayish ridges of cut
grass, and the black heaps of coats, taken off by the
mowers at the place from which they had started cutting.
Anna Karenina
544 of 1759
Gradually, as he rode towards the meadow, the peasants
came into sight, some in coats, some in their shirts
mowing, one behind another in a long string, swinging
their scythes differently. He counted forty-two of them.
They were mowing slowly over the uneven, low-lying
parts of the meadow, where there had been an old dam.
Levin recognized some of his own men. Here was old
Yermil in a very long white smock, bending forward to
swing a scythe; there was a young fellow, Vaska, who had
been a coachman of Levin’s, taking every row with a wide
sweep. Here, too, was Tit, Levin’s preceptor in the art of
mowing, a thin little peasant. He was in front of all, and
cut his wide row without bending, as though playing with
the scythe.
Levin got off his mare, and fastening her up by the
roadside went to meet Tit, who took a second scythe out
of a bush and gave it to him.
‘It’s ready, sir; it’s like a razor, cuts of itself,’ said Tit,
taking off his cap with a smile and giving him the scythe.
Levin took the scythe, and began trying it. As they
finished their rows, the mowers, hot and good-humored,
came out into the road one after another, and, laughing a
little, greeted the master. They all stared at him, but no
one made any remark, till a tall old man, with a wrinkled,
Anna Karenina
545 of 1759
beardless face, wearing a short sheepskin jacket, came out
into the road and accosted him.
‘Look’ee now, master, once take hold of the rope
there’s no letting it go!’ he said, and Levin heard
smothered laughter among the mowers.
‘I’ll try not to let it go,’ he said, taking his stand behind
Tit, and waiting for the time to begin.
‘Mind’ee,’ repeated the old man.
Tit made room, and Levin started behind him. The
grass was short close to the road, and Levin, who had not
done any mowing for a long while, and was disconcerted
by the eyes fastened upon him, cut badly for the first
moments, though he swung his scythe vigorously. Behind
him he heard voices:
‘It’s not set right; handle’s too high; see how he has to
stoop to it,’ said one.
‘Press more on the heel,’ said another.
‘Never mind, he’ll get on all right,’ the old man
resumed.
‘He’s made a start.... You swing it too wide, you’ll tire
yourself out.... The master, sure, does his best for himself!
But see the grass missed out! For such work us fellows
would catch it!’
Anna Karenina
546 of 1759
The grass became softer, and Levin, listening without
answering, followed Tit, trying to do the best he could.
They moved a hundred paces. Tit kept moving on,
without stopping, not showing the slightest weariness, but
Levin was already beginning to be afraid he would not be
able to keep it up: he was so tired.
He felt as he swung his scythe that he was at the very
end of his strength, and was making up his mind to ask Tit
to stop. But at that very moment Tit stopped of his own
accord, and stooping down picked up some grass, rubbed
his scythe, and began whetting it. Levin straightened
himself, and drawing a deep breath looked round. Behind
him came a peasant, and he too was evidently tired, for he
stopped at once without waiting to mow up to Levin, and
began whetting his scythe. Tit sharpened his scythe and
Levin’s, and they went on. The next time it was just the
same. Tit moved on with sweep after sweep of his scythe,
not stopping or showing signs of weariness. Levin
followed him, trying not to get left behind, and he found
it harder and harder: the moment came when he felt he
had no strength left, but at that very moment Tit stopped
and whetted the scythes.
So they mowed the first row. And this long row
seemed particularly hard work to Levin; but when the end
Anna Karenina
547 of 1759
was reached and Tit, shouldering his scythe, began with
deliberate stride returning on the tracks left by his heels in
the cut grass, and Levin walked back in the same way over
the space he had cut, in spite of the sweat that ran in
streams over his face and fell in drops down his nose, and
drenched his back as though he had been soaked in water,
he felt very happy. What delighted him particularly was
that now he knew he would be able to hold out.
His pleasure was only disturbed by his row not being
well cut. ‘I will swing less with my arm and more with my
whole body,’ he thought, comparing Tit’s row, which
looked as if it had been cut with a line, with his own
unevenly and irregularly lying grass.
The first row, as Levin noticed, Tit had mowed
specially quickly, probably wishing to put his master to the
test, and the row happened to be a long one. The next
rows were easier, but still Levin had to strain every nerve
not to drop behind the peasants.
He thought of nothing, wished for nothing, but not to
be left behind the peasants, and to do his work as well as
possible. He heard nothing but the swish of scythes, and
saw before him Tit’s upright figure mowing away, the
crescent-shaped curve of the cut grass, the grass and flower
heads slowly and rhythmically falling before the blade of
Anna Karenina
548 of 1759
his scythe, and ahead of him the end of the row, where
would come the rest.
Suddenly, in the midst of his toil, without
understanding what it was or whence it came, he felt a
pleasant sensation of chill on his hot, moist shoulders. He
glanced at the sky in the interval for whetting the scythes.
A heavy, lowering storm cloud had blown up, and big
raindrops were falling. Some of the peasants went to their
coats and put them on; others—just like Levin himself—
merely shrugged their shoulders, enjoying the pleasant
coolness of it.
Another row, and yet another row, followed—long
rows and short rows, with good grass and with poor grass.
Levin lost all sense of time, and could not have told
whether it was late or early now. A change began to come
over his work, which gave him immense satisfaction. In
the midst of his toil there were moments during which he
forgot what he was doing, and it came all easy to him, and
at those same moments his row was almost as smooth and
well cut as Tit’s. But so soon as he recollected what he
was doing, and began trying to do better, he was at once
conscious of all the difficulty of his task, and the row was
badly mown.
Anna Karenina
549 of 1759
On finishing yet another row he would have gone back
to the top of the meadow again to begin the next, but Tit
stopped, and going up to the old man said something in a
low voice to him. They both looked at the sun. ‘What are
they talking about, and why doesn’t he go back?’ thought
Levin, not guessing that the peasants had been mowing no
less than four hours without stopping, and it was time for
their lunch.
‘Lunch, sir,’ said the old man.
‘Is it really time? That’s right; lunch, then.’
Levin gave his scythe to Tit, and together with the
peasants, who were crossing the long stretch of mown
grass, slightly sprinkled with rain, to get their bread from
the heap of coats, he went towards his house. Only then
he suddenly awoke to the fact that he had been wrong
about the weather and the rain was drenching his hay.
‘The hay will be spoiled,’ he said.
‘Not a bit of it, sir; mow in the rain, and you’ll rake in
fine weather!’ said the old man.
Levin untied his horse and rode home to his coffee.
Sergey Ivanovitch was only just getting up. When he had
drunk his coffee, Levin rode back again to the mowing
before Sergey Ivanovitch had had time to dress and come
down to the dining room.
Anna Karenina
550 of 1759
Chapter 5
After lunch Levin was not in the same place in the
string of mowers as before, but stood between the old man
who had accosted him jocosely, and now invited him to
be his neighbor, and a young peasant, who had only been
married in the autumn, and who was mowing this summer
for the first time.
The old man, holding himself erect, moved in front,
with his feet turned out, taking long, regular strides, and
with a precise and regular action which seemed to cost
him no more effort than swinging one’s arms in walking,
as though it were in play, he laid down the high, even
row of grass. It was as though it were not he but the sharp
scythe of itself swishing through the juicy grass.
Behind Levin came the lad Mishka. His pretty, boyish
face, with a twist of fresh grass bound round his hair, was
all working with effort; but whenever anyone looked at
him he smiled. He would clearly have died sooner than
own it was hard work for him.
Levin kept between them. In the very heat of the day
the mowing did not seem such hard work to him. The
perspiration with which he was drenched cooled him,
Anna Karenina
551 of 1759
while the sun, that burned his back, his head, and his arms,
bare to the elbow, gave a vigor and dogged energy to his
labor; and more and more often now came those moments
of unconsciousness, when it was possible not to think
what one was doing. The scythe cut of itself. These were
happy moments. Still more delightful were the moments
when they reached the stream where the rows ended, and
the old man rubbed his scythe with the wet, thick grass,
rinsed its blade in the fresh water of the stream, ladled out
a little in a tin dipper, and offered Levin a drink.
‘What do you say to my home-brew, eh? Good, eh?’
said he, winking.
And truly Levin had never drunk any liquor so good as
this warm water with green bits floating in it, and a taste
of rust from the tin dipper. And immediately after this
came the delicious, slow saunter, with his hand on the
scythe, during which he could wipe away the streaming
sweat, take deep breaths of air, and look about at the long
string of mowers and at what was happening around in the
forest and the country.
The longer Levin mowed, the oftener he felt the
moments of unconsciousness in which it seemed not his
hands that swung the scythe, but the scythe mowing of
itself, a body full of life and consciousness of its own, and
Anna Karenina
552 of 1759
as though by magic, without thinking of it, the work
turned out regular and well-finished of itself. These were
the most blissful moments.
It was only hard work when he had to break off the
motion, which had become unconscious, and to think;
when he had to mow round a hillock or a tuft of sorrel.
The old man did this easily. When a hillock came he
changed his action, and at one time with the heel, and at
another with the tip of his scythe, clipped the hillock
round both sides with short strokes. And while he did this
he kept looking about and watching what came into his
view: at one moment he picked a wild berry and ate it or
offered it to Levin, then he flung away a twig with the
blade of the scythe, then he looked at a quail’s nest, from
which the bird flew just under the scythe, or caught a
snake that crossed his path, and lifting it on the scythe as
though on a fork showed it to Levin and threw it away.
For both Levin and the young peasant behind him,
such changes of position were difficult. Both of them,
repeating over and over again the same strained
movement, were in a perfect frenzy of toil, and were
incapable of shifting their position and at the same time
watching what was before them.
Anna Karenina
553 of 1759
Levin did not notice how time was passing. If he had
been asked how long he had been working he would have
said half an hour— and it was getting on for dinner time.
As they were walking back over the cut grass, the old man
called Levin’s attention to the little girls and boys who
were coming from different directions, hardly visible
through the long grass, and along the road towards the
mowers, carrying sacks of bread dragging at their little
hands and pitchers of the sour rye-beer, with cloths
wrapped round them.
‘Look’ee, the little emmets crawling!’ he said, pointing
to them, and he shaded his eyes with his hand to look at
the sun. They mowed two more rows; the old man
stopped.
‘Come, master, dinner time!’ he said briskly. And on
reaching the stream the mowers moved off across the lines
of cut grass towards their pile of coats, where the children
who had brought their dinners were sitting waiting for
them. The peasants gathered into groups—those further
away under a cart, those nearer under a willow bush.
Levin sat down by them; he felt disinclined to go away.
All constraint with the master had disappeared long
ago. The peasants got ready for dinner. Some washed, the
young lads bathed in the stream, others made a place
Anna Karenina
554 of 1759
comfortable for a rest, untied their sacks of bread, and
uncovered the pitchers of rye-beer. The old man
crumbled up some bread in a cup, stirred it with the
handle of a spoon, poured water on it from the dipper,
broke up some more bread, and having seasoned it with
salt, he turned to the east to say his prayer.
‘Come, master, taste my sop,’ said he, kneeling down
before the cup.
The sop was so good that Levin gave up the idea of
going home. He dined with the old man, and talked to
him about his family affairs, taking the keenest interest in
them, and told him about his own affairs and all the
circumstances that could be of interest to the old man. He
felt much nearer to him than to his brother, and could not
help smiling at the affection he felt for this man. When the
old man got up again, said his prayer, and lay down under
a bush, putting some grass under his head for a pillow,
Levin did the same, and in spite of the clinging flies that
were so persistent in the sunshine, and the midges that
tickled his hot face and body, he fell asleep at once and
only waked when the sun had passed to the other side of
the bush and reached him. The old man had been awake a
long while, and was sitting up whetting the scythes of the
younger lads.
Anna Karenina
555 of 1759
Levin looked about him and hardly recognized the
place, everything was so changed. The immense stretch of
meadow had been mown and was sparkling with a
peculiar fresh brilliance, with its lines of already sweetsmelling grass in the slanting rays of the evening sun. And
the bushes about the river had been cut down, and the
river itself, not visible before, now gleaming like steel in
its bends, and the moving, ascending peasants, and the
sharp wall of grass of the unmown part of the meadow,
and the hawks hovering over the stripped meadow—all
was perfectly new. Raising himself, Levin began
considering how much had been cut and how much more
could still be done that day.
The work done was exceptionally much for forty-two
men. They had cut the whole of the big meadow, which
had, in the years of serf labor, taken thirty scythes two days
to mow. Only the corners remained to do, where the
rows were short. But Levin felt a longing to get as much
mowing done that day as possible, and was vexed with the
sun sinking so quickly in the sky. He felt no weariness; all
he wanted was to get his work done more and more
quickly and as much done as possible.
‘Could you cut Mashkin Upland too?—what do you
think?’ he said to the old man.
Anna Karenina
556 of 1759
‘As God wills, the sun’s not high. A little vodka for the
lads?’
At the afternoon rest, when they were sitting down
again, and those who smoked had lighted their pipes, the
old man told the men that ‘Mashkin Upland’s to be cut—
there’ll be some vodka.’
‘Why not cut it? Come on, Tit! We’ll look sharp! We
can eat at night. Come on!’ cried voices, and eating up
their bread, the mowers went back to work.
‘Come, lads, keep it up!’ said Tit, and ran on ahead
almost at a trot.
‘Get along, get along!’ said the old man, hurrying after
him and easily overtaking him, ‘I’ll mow you down, look
out!’
And young and old mowed away, as though they were
racing with one another. But however fast they worked,
they did not spoil the grass, and the rows were laid just as
neatly and exactly. The little piece left uncut in the corner
was mown in five minutes. The last of the mowers were
just ending their rows while the foremost snatched up
their coats onto their shoulders, and crossed the road
towards Mashkin Upland.
The sun was already sinking into the trees when they
went with their jingling dippers into the wooded ravine of
Anna Karenina
557 of 1759
Mashkin Upland. The grass was up to their waists in the
middle of the hollow, soft, tender, and feathery, spotted
here and there among the trees with wild heart’s-ease.
After a brief consultation—whether to take the rows
lengthwise or diagonally—Prohor Yermilin, also a
renowned mower, a huge, black-haired peasant, went on
ahead. He went up to the top, turned back again and
started mowing, and they all proceeded to form in line
behind him, going downhill through the hollow and
uphill right up to the edge of the forest. The sun sank
behind the forest. The dew was falling by now; the
mowers were in the sun only on the hillside, but below,
where a mist was rising, and on the opposite side, they
mowed into the fresh, dewy shade. The work went
rapidly. The grass cut with a juicy sound, and was at once
laid in high, fragrant rows. The mowers from all sides,
brought closer together in the short row, kept urging one
another on to the sound of jingling dipper and clanging
scythes, and the hiss of the whetstones sharpening them,
and good-humored shouts.
Levin still kept between the young peasant and the old
man. The old man, who had put on his short sheepskin
jacket, was just as good-humored, jocose, and free in his
movements. Among the trees they were continually
Anna Karenina
558 of 1759
cutting with their scythes the so-called ‘birch mushrooms,’
swollen fat in the succulent grass. But the old man bent
down every time he came across a mushroom, picked it
up and put it in his bosom. ‘Another present for my old
woman,’ he said as he did so.
Easy as it was to mow the wet, soft grass, it was hard
work going up and down the steep sides of the ravine. But
this did not trouble the old man. Swinging his scythe just
as ever, and moving his feet in their big, plaited shoes with
firm, little steps, he climbed slowly up the steep place, and
though his breeches hanging out below his smock, and his
whole frame trembled with effort, he did not miss one
blade of grass or one mushroom on his way, and kept
making jokes with the peasants and Levin. Levin walked
after him and often thought he must fall, as he climbed
with a scythe up a steep cliff where it would have been
hard work to clamber without anything. But he climbed
up and did what he had to do. He felt as though some
external force were moving him.
Anna Karenina
559 of 1759
Chapter 6
Mashkin Upland was mown, the last row finished, the
peasants had put on their coats and were gaily trudging
home. Levin got on his horse and, parting regretfully from
the peasants, rode homewards. On the hillside he looked
back; he could not see them in the mist that had risen
from the valley; he could only hear rough, good-humored
voices, laughter, and the sound of clanking scythes.
Sergey Ivanovitch had long ago finished dinner, and
was drinking iced lemon and water in his own room,
looking through the reviews and papers which he had
only just received by post, when Levin rushed into the
room, talking merrily, with his wet and matted hair
sticking to his forehead, and his back and chest grimed and
moist.
‘We mowed the whole meadow! Oh, it is nice,
delicious! And how have you been getting on?’ said Levin,
completely forgetting the disagreeable conversation of the
previous day.
‘Mercy! what do you look like!’ said Sergey Ivanovitch,
for the first moment looking round with some
Anna Karenina
560 of 1759
dissatisfaction. ‘And the door, do shut the door!’ he cried.
‘You must have let in a dozen at least.’
Sergey Ivanovitch could not endure flies, and in his
own room he never opened the window except at night,
and carefully kept the door shut.
‘Not one, on my honor. But if I have, I’ll catch them.
You wouldn’t believe what a pleasure it is! How have you
spent the day?’
‘Very well. But have you really been mowing the
whole day? I expect you’re as hungry as a wolf. Kouzma
has got everything ready for you.’
‘No, I don’t feel hungry even. I had something to eat
there. But I’ll go and wash.’
‘Yes, go along, go along, and I’ll come to you directly,’
said Sergey Ivanovitch, shaking his head as he looked at
his brother. ‘Go along, make haste,’ he added smiling, and
gathering up his books, he prepared to go too. He, too,
felt suddenly good-humored and disinclined to leave his
brother’s side. ‘But what did you do while it was raining?’
‘Rain? Why, there was scarcely a drop. I’ll come
directly. So you had a nice day too? That’s first-rate.’ And
Levin went off to change his clothes.
Five minutes later the brothers met in the dining room.
Although it seemed to Levin that he was not hungry, and
Anna Karenina
561 of 1759
he sat down to dinner simply so as not to hurt Kouzma’s
feelings, yet when he began to eat the dinner struck him as
extraordinarily good. Sergey Ivanovitch watched him with
a smile.
‘Oh, by the way, there’s a letter for you,’ said he.
‘Kouzma, bring it down, please. And mind you shut the
doors.’
The letter was from Oblonsky. Levin read it aloud.
Oblonsky wrote to him from Petersburg: ‘I have had a
letter from Dolly; she’s at Ergushovo, and everything
seems going wrong there. Do ride over and see her,
please; help her with advice; you know all about it. She
will be so glad to see you. She’s quite alone, poor thing.
My mother-in-law and all of them are still abroad.’
‘That’s capital! I will certainly ride over to her,’ said
Levin. ‘Or we’ll go together. She’s such a splendid
woman, isn’t she?’
‘They’re not far from here, then?’
‘Twenty-five miles. Or perhaps it is thirty. But a capital
road. Capital, we’ll drive over.’
‘I shall be delighted,’ said Sergey Ivanovitch, still
smiling. The sight of his younger brother’s appearance had
immediately put him in a good humor.
Anna Karenina
562 of 1759
‘Well, you have an appetite!’ he said, looking at his
dark-red, sunburnt face and neck bent over the plate.
‘Splendid! You can’t imagine what an effectual remedy
it is for every sort of foolishness. I want to enrich medicine
with a new word: Arbeitskur.’
‘Well, but you don’t need it, I should fancy.’
‘No, but for all sorts of nervous invalids.’
‘Yes, it ought to be tried. I had meant to come to the
mowing to look at you, but it was so unbearably hot that I
got no further than the forest. I sat there a little, and went
on by the forest to the village, met your old nurse, and
sounded her as to the peasants’ view of you. As far as I can
make out, they don’t approve of this. She said: ‘It’s not a
gentleman’s work.’ Altogether, I fancy that in the people’s
ideas there are very clear and definite notions of certain, as
they call it, ‘gentlemanly’ lines of action. And they don’t
sanction the gentry’s moving outside bounds clearly laid
down in their ideas.’
‘Maybe so; but anyway it’s a pleasure such as I have
never known in my life. And there’s no harm in it, you
know. Is there?’ answered Levin. ‘I can’t help it if they
don’t like it. Though I do believe it’s all right. Eh?’
‘Altogether,’ pursued Sergey Ivanovitch, ‘you’re
satisfied with your day?’
Anna Karenina
563 of 1759
‘Quite satisfied. We cut the whole meadow. And such
a splendid old man I made friends with there! You can’t
fancy how delightful he was!’
‘Well, so you’re content with your day. And so am I.
First, I solved two chess problems, and one a very pretty
one—a pawn opening. I’ll show it you. And then—I
thought over our conversation yesterday.’
‘Eh! our conversation yesterday?’ said Levin, blissfully
dropping his eyelids and drawing deep breaths after
finishing his dinner, and absolutely incapable of recalling
what their conversation yesterday was about.
‘I think you are partly right. Our difference of opinion
amounts to this, that you make the mainspring selfinterest, while I suppose that interest in the common weal
is bound to exist in every man of a certain degree of
advancement. Possibly you are right too, that action
founded on material interest would be more desirable.
You are altogether, as the French say, too primesautiere a
nature; you must have intense, energetic action, or
nothing.’
Levin listened to his brother and did not understand a
single word, and did not want to understand. He was only
afraid his brother might ask him some question which
would make it evident he had not heard.
Anna Karenina
564 of 1759
‘So that’s what I think it is, my dear boy,’ said Sergey
Ivanovitch, touching him on the shoulder.
‘Yes, of course. But, do you know? I won’t stand up
for my view,’ answered Levin, with a guilty, childlike
smile. ‘Whatever was it I was disputing about?’ he
wondered. ‘Of course, I’m right, and he’s right, and it’s all
first-rate. Only I must go round to the counting house and
see to things.’ He got up, stretching and smiling. Sergey
Ivanovitch smiled too.
‘If you want to go out, let’s go together,’ he said,
disinclined to be parted from his brother, who seemed
positively breathing out freshness and energy. ‘Come,
we’ll go to the counting house, if you have to go there.’
‘Oh, heavens!’ shouted Levin, so loudly that Sergey
Ivanovitch was quite frightened.
‘What, what is the matter?’
‘How’s Agafea Mihalovna’s hand?’ said Levin, slapping
himself on the head. ‘I’d positively forgotten her even.’
‘It’s much better.’
‘Well, anyway I’ll run down to her. Before you’ve time
to get your hat on, I’ll be back.’
And he ran downstairs, clattering with his heels like a
spring-rattle.
Anna Karenina
565 of 1759
Chapter 7
Stephan Arkadyevitch had gone to Petersburg to
perform the most natural and essential official duty—so
familiar to everyone in the government service, though
incomprehensible to outsiders— that duty, but for which
one could hardly be in government service, of reminding
the ministry of his existence—and having, for the due
performance of this rite, taken all the available cash from
home, was gaily and agreeably spending his days at the
races and in the summer villas. Meanwhile Dolly and the
children had moved into the country, to cut down
expenses as much as possible. She had gone to Ergushovo,
the estate that had been her dowry, and the one where in
spring the forest had been sold. It was nearly forty miles
from Levin’s Pokrovskoe. The big, old house at
Ergushovo had been pulled down long ago, and the old
prince had had the lodge done up and built on to. Twenty
years before, when Dolly was a child, the lodge had been
roomy and comfortable, though, like all lodges, it stood
sideways to the entrance avenue, and faced the south. But
by now this lodge was old and dilapidated. When Stepan
Arkadyevitch had gone down in the spring to sell the
Anna Karenina
566 of 1759
forest, Dolly had begged him to look over the house and
order what repairs might be needed. Stepan Arkadyevitch,
like all unfaithful husbands indeed, was very solicitous for
his wife’s comfort, and he had himself looked over the
house, and given instructions about everything that he
considered necessary. What he considered necessary was to
cover all the furniture with cretonne, to put up curtains,
to weed the garden, to make a little bridge on the pond,
and to plant flowers. But he forgot many other essential
matters, the want of which greatly distressed Darya
Alexandrovna later on.
In spite of Stepan Arkadyevitch’s efforts to be an
attentive father and husband, he never could keep in his
mind that he had a wife and children. He had bachelor
tastes, and it was in accordance with them that he shaped
his life. On his return to Moscow he informed his wife
with pride that everything was ready, that the house
would be a little paradise, and that he advised her most
certainly to go. His wife’s staying away in the country was
very agreeable to Stepan Arkadyevitch from every point of
view: it did the children good, it decreased expenses, and
it left him more at liberty. Darya Alexandrovna regarded
staying in the country for the summer as essential for the
children, especially for the little girl, who had not
Anna Karenina
567 of 1759
succeeded in regaining her strength after the scarlatina, and
also as a means of escaping the petty humiliations, the little
bills owing to the wood-merchant, the fishmonger, the
shoemaker, which made her miserable. Besides this, she
was pleased to go away to the country because she was
dreaming of getting her sister Kitty to stay with her there.
Kitty was to be back from abroad in the middle of the
summer, and bathing had been prescribed for her. Kitty
wrote that no prospect was so alluring as to spend the
summer with Dolly at Ergushovo, full of childish
associations for both of them.
The first days of her existence in the country were very
hard for Dolly. She used to stay in the country as a child,
and the impression she had retained of it was that the
country was a refuge from all the unpleasantness of the
town, that life there, though not luxurious—Dolly could
easily make up her mind to that—was cheap and
comfortable; that there was plenty of everything,
everything was cheap, everything could be got, and
children were happy. But now coming to the country as
the head of a family, she perceived that it was all utterly
unlike what she had fancied.
The day after their arrival there was a heavy fall of rain
and in the night the water came through in the corridor
Anna Karenina
568 of 1759
and in the nursery, so that the beds had to be carried into
the drawing room. There was no kitchen maid to be
found; of the nine cows, it appeared from the words of the
cowherd-woman that some were about to calve, others
had just calved, others were old, and others again harduddered; there was not butter nor milk enough even for
the children. There were no eggs. They could get no
fowls; old, purplish, stringy cocks were all they had for
roasting and boiling. Impossible to get women to scrub
the floors—all were potato-hoeing. Driving was out of the
question, because one of the horses was restive, and bolted
in the shafts. There was no place where they could bathe;
the whole of the river-bank was trampled by the cattle and
open to the road; even walks were impossible, for the
cattle strayed into the garden through a gap in the hedge,
and there was one terrible bull, who bellowed, and
therefore might be expected to gore somebody. There
were no proper cupboards for their clothes; what
cupboards there were either would not close at all, or
burst open whenever anyone passed by them. There were
no pots and pans; there was no copper in the washhouse,
nor even an ironing-board in the maids’ room.
Finding instead of peace and rest all these, from her
point of view, fearful calamities, Darya Alexandrovna was
Anna Karenina
569 of 1759
at first in despair. She exerted herself to the utmost, felt
the hopelessness of the position, and was every instant
suppressing the tears that started into her eyes. The bailiff,
a retired quartermaster, whom Stepan Arkadyevitch had
taken a fancy to and had appointed bailiff on account of
his handsome and respectful appearance as a hall-porter,
showed no sympathy for Darya Alexandrovna’s woes. He
said respectfully, ‘nothing can be done, the peasants are
such a wretched lot,’ and did nothing to help her.
The position seemed hopeless. But in the Oblonskys’
household, as in all families indeed, there was one
inconspicuous but most valuable and useful person, Marya
Philimonovna. She soothed her mistress, assured her that
everything would come round (it was her expression, and
Matvey had borrowed it from her), and without fuss or
hurry proceeded to set to work herself. She had
immediately made friends with the bailiff’s wife, and on
the very first day she drank tea with her and the bailiff
under the acacias, and reviewed all the circumstances of
the position. Very soon Marya Philimonovna had
established her club, so to say, under the acacias, and there
it was, in this club, consisting of the bailiff’s wife, the
village elder, and the counting house clerk, that the
difficulties of existence were gradually smoothed away,
Anna Karenina
570 of 1759
and in a week’s time everything actually had come round.
The roof was mended, a kitchen maid was found—a
crony of the village elder’s—hens were bought, the cows
began giving milk, the garden hedge was stopped up with
stakes, the carpenter made a mangle, hooks were put in
the cupboards, and they ceased to burst open
spontaneously, and an ironing-board covered with army
cloth was placed across from the arm of a chair to the
chest of drawers, and there was a smell of flatirons in the
maids’ room.
‘Just see, now, and you were quite in despair,’ said
Marya Philimonovna, pointing to the ironing-board. They
even rigged up a bathing-shed of straw hurdles. Lily began
to bathe, and Darya Alexandrovna began to realize, if only
in part, her expectations, if not of a peaceful, at least of a
comfortable, life in the country. Peaceful with six children
Darya Alexandrovna could not be. One would fall ill,
another might easily become so, a third would be without
something necessary, a fourth would show symptoms of a
bad disposition, and so on. Rare indeed were the brief
periods of peace. But these cares and anxieties were for
Darya Alexandrovna the sole happiness possible. Had it
not been for them, she would have been left alone to
brood over her husband who did not love her. And
Anna Karenina
571 of 1759
besides, hard though it was for the mother to bear the
dread of illness, the illnesses themselves, and the grief of
seeing signs of evil propensities in her children—the
children themselves were even now repaying her in small
joys for her sufferings. Those joys were so small that they
passed unnoticed, like gold in sand, and at bad moments
she could see nothing but the pain, nothing but sand; but
there were good moments too when she saw nothing but
the joy, nothing but gold.
Now in the solitude of the country, she began to be
more and more frequently aware of those joys. Often,
looking at them, she would make every possible effort to
persuade herself that she was mistaken, that she as a
mother was partial to her children. All the same, she could
not help saying to herself that she had charming children,
all six of them in different ways, but a set of children such
as is not often to be met with, and she was happy in them,
and proud of them.
Anna Karenina
572 of 1759
Chapter 8
Towards the end of May, when everything had been
more or less satisfactorily arranged, she received her
husband’s answer to her complaints of the disorganized
state of things in the country. He wrote begging her
forgiveness for not having thought of everything before,
and promised to come down at the first chance. This
chance did not present itself, and till the beginning of June
Darya Alexandrovna stayed alone in the country.
On the Sunday in St. Peter’s week Darya Alexandrovna
drove to mass for all her children to take the sacrament.
Darya Alexandrovna in her intimate, philosophical talks
with her sister, her mother, and her friends very often
astonished them by the freedom of her views in regard to
religion. She had a strange religion of transmigration of
souls all her own, in which she had firm faith, troubling
herself little about the dogmas of the Church. But in her
family she was strict in carrying out all that was required
by the Church—and not merely in order to set an
example, but with all her heart in it. The fact that the
children had not been at the sacrament for nearly a year
worried her extremely, and with the full approval and
Anna Karenina
573 of 1759
sympathy of Marya Philimonovna she decided that this
should take place now in the summer.
For several days before, Darya Alexandrovna was busily
deliberating on how to dress all the children. Frocks were
made or altered and washed, seams and flounces were let
out, buttons were sewn on, and ribbons got ready. One
dress, Tanya’s, which the English governess had
undertaken, cost Darya Alexandrovna much loss of
temper. The English governess in altering it had made the
seams in the wrong place, had taken up the sleeves too
much, and altogether spoilt the dress. It was so narrow on
Tanya’s shoulders that it was quite painful to look at her.
But Marya Philimonovna had the happy thought of
putting in gussets, and adding a little shoulder-cape. The
dress was set right, but there was nearly a quarrel with the
English governess. On the morning, however, all was
happily arranged, and towards ten o’clock—the time at
which they had asked the priest to wait for them for the
mass—the children in their new dresses, with beaming
faces stood on the step before the carriage waiting for their
mother.
To the carriage, instead of the restive Raven, they had
harnessed, thanks to the representations of Marya
Philimonovna, the bailiff’s horse, Brownie, and Darya
Anna Karenina
574 of 1759
Alexandrovna, delayed by anxiety over her own attire,
came out and got in, dressed in a white muslin gown.
Darya Alexandrovna had done her hair, and dressed
with care and excitement. In the old days she had dressed
for her own sake to look pretty and be admired. Later on,
as she got older, dress became more and more distasteful to
her. She saw that she was losing her good looks. But now
she began to feel pleasure and interest in dress again. Now
she did not dress for her own sake, not for the sake of her
own beauty, but simply that as the mother of those
exquisite creatures she might not spoil the general effect.
And looking at herself for the last time in the looking-glass
she was satisfied with herself. She looked nice. Not nice as
she would have wished to look nice in old days at a ball,
but nice for the object which she now had in view.
In the church there was no one but the peasants, the
servants and their women-folk. But Darya Alexandrovna
saw, or fancied she saw, the sensation produced by her
children and her. The children were not only beautiful to
look at in their smart little dresses, but they were charming
in the way they behaved. Aliosha, it is true, did not stand
quite correctly; he kept turning round, trying to look at
his little jacket from behind; but all the same he was
wonderfully sweet. Tanya behaved like a grownup person,
Anna Karenina
575 of 1759
and looked after the little ones. And the smallest, Lily, was
bewitching in her naive astonishment at everything, and it
was difficult not to smile when, after taking the sacrament,
she said in English, ‘Please, some more.’
On the way home the children felt that something
solemn had happened, and were very sedate.
Everything went happily at home too; but at lunch
Grisha began whistling, and, what was worse, was
disobedient to the English governess, and was forbidden to
have any tart. Darya Alexandrovna would not have let
things go so far on such a day had she been present; but
she had to support the English governess’s authority, and
she upheld her decision that Grisha should have no tart.
This rather spoiled the general good humor. Grisha cried,
declaring that Nikolinka had whistled too, and he was not
punished, and that he wasn’t crying for the tart—he didn’t
care—but at being unjustly treated. This was really too
tragic, and Darya Alexandrovna made up her mind to
persuade the English governess to forgive Grisha, and she
went to speak to her. But on the way, as she passed the
drawing room, she beheld a scene, filling her heart with
such pleasure that the tears came into her eyes, and she
forgave the delinquent herself.
Anna Karenina
576 of 1759
The culprit was sitting at the window in the corner of
the drawing room; beside him was standing Tanya with a
plate. On the pretext of wanting to give some dinner to
her dolls, she had asked the governess’s permission to take
her share of tart to the nursery, and had taken it instead to
her brother. While still weeping over the injustice of his
punishment, he was eating the tart, and kept saying
through his sobs, ‘Eat yourself; let’s eat it
together...together.’
Tanya had at first been under the influence of her pity
for Grisha, then of a sense of her noble action, and tears
were standing in her eyes too; but she did not refuse, and
ate her share.
On catching sight of their mother they were dismayed,
but, looking into her face, they saw they were not doing
wrong. They burst out laughing, and, with their mouths
full of tart, they began wiping their smiling lips with their
hands, and smearing their radiant faces all over with tears
and jam.
‘Mercy! Your new white frock; Tanya! Grisha!’ said
their mother, trying to save the frock, but with tears in her
eyes, smiling a blissful, rapturous smile.
The new frocks were taken off, and orders were given
for the little girls to have their blouses put on, and the
Anna Karenina
577 of 1759
boys their old jackets, and the wagonette to be harnessed;
with Brownie, to the bailiff’s annoyance, again in the
shafts, to drive out for mushroom picking and bathing. A
roar of delighted shrieks arose in the nursery, and never
ceased till they had set off for the bathing-place.
They gathered a whole basketful of mushrooms; even
Lily found a birch mushroom. It had always happened
before that Miss Hoole found them and pointed them out
to her; but this time she found a big one quite of herself,
and there was a general scream of delight, ‘Lily has found a
mushroom!’
Then they reached the river, put the horses under the
birch trees, and went to the bathing-place. The coachman,
Terenty, fastened the horses, who kept whisking away the
flies, to a tree, and, treading down the grass, lay down in
the shade of a birch and smoked his shag, while the neverceasing shrieks of delight of the children floated across to
him from the bathing-place.
Though it was hard work to look after all the children
and restrain their wild pranks, though it was difficult too
to keep in one’s head and not mix up all the stockings,
little breeches, and shoes for the different legs, and to
undo and to do up again all the tapes and buttons, Darya
Alexandrovna, who had always liked bathing herself, and
Anna Karenina
578 of 1759
believed it to be very good for the children, enjoyed
nothing so much as bathing with all the children. To go
over all those fat little legs, pulling on their stockings, to
take in her arms and dip those little naked bodies, and to
hear their screams of delight and alarm, to see the
breathless faces with wide-open, scared, and happy eyes of
all her splashing cherubs, was a great pleasure to her.
When half the children had been dressed, some peasant
women in holiday dress, out picking herbs, came up to the
bathing-shed and stopped shyly. Marya Philimonovna
called one of them and handed her a sheet and a shirt that
had dropped into the water for her to dry them, and
Darya Alexandrovna began to talk to the women. At first
they laughed behind their hands and did not understand
her questions, but soon they grew bolder and began to
talk, winning Darya Alexandrovna’s heart at once by the
genuine admiration of the children that they showed.
‘My, what a beauty! as white as sugar,’ said one,
admiring Tanitchka, and shaking her head; ‘but thin..’
‘Yes, she has been ill.’
‘And so they’ve been bathing you too,’ said another to
the baby.
‘No; he’s only three months old,’ answered Darya
Alexandrovna with pride.
Anna Karenina
579 of 1759
‘You don’t say so!’
‘And have you any children?’
‘I’ve had four; I’ve two living—a boy and a girl. I
weaned her last carnival.’
‘How old is she?’
‘Why, two years old.’
‘Why did you nurse her so long?’
‘It’s our custom; for three fasts..’
And the conversation became most interesting to Darya
Alexandrovna. What sort of time did she have? What was
the matter with the boy? Where was her husband? Did it
often happen?
Darya Alexandrovna felt disinclined to leave the peasant
women, so interesting to her was their conversation, so
completely identical were all their interests. What pleased
her most of all was that she saw clearly what all the
women admired more than anything was her having so
many children, and such fine ones. The peasant women
even made Darya Alexandrovna laugh, and offended the
English governess, because she was the cause of the
laughter she did not understand. One of the younger
women kept staring at the Englishwoman, who was
dressing after all the rest, and when she put on her third
petticoat she could not refrain from the remark, ‘My, she
Anna Karenina
580 of 1759
keeps putting on and putting on, and she’ll never have
done!’ she said, and they all went off into roars.
Anna Karenina
581 of 1759
Chapter 9
On the drive home, as Darya Alexandrovna, with all
her children round her, their heads still wet from their
bath, and a kerchief tied over her own head, was getting
near the house, the coachman said, ‘There’s some
gentleman coming: the master of Pokrovskoe, I do
believe.’
Darya Alexandrovna peeped out in front, and was
delighted when she recognized in the gray hat and gray
coat the familiar figure of Levin walking to meet them.
She was glad to see him at any time, but at this moment
she was specially glad he should see her in all her glory.
No one was better able to appreciate her grandeur than
Levin.
Seeing her, he found himself face to face with one of
the pictures of his daydream of family life.
‘You’re like a hen with your chickens, Darya
Alexandrovna.’
‘Ah, how glad I am to see you!’ she said, holding out
her hand to him.
Anna Karenina
582 of 1759
‘Glad to see me, but you didn’t let me know. My
brother’s staying with me. I got a note from Stiva that you
were here.’
‘From Stiva?’ Darya Alexandrovna asked with surprise.
‘Yes; he writes that you are here, and that he thinks
you might allow me to be of use to you,’ said Levin, and
as he said it he became suddenly embarrassed, and,
stopping abruptly, he walked on in silence by the
wagonette, snapping off the buds of the lime trees and
nibbling them. He was embarrassed through a sense that
Darya Alexandrovna would be annoyed by receiving from
an outsider help that should by rights have come from her
own husband. Darya Alexandrovna certainly did not like
this little way of Stepan Arkadyevitch’s of foisting his
domestic duties on others. And she was at once aware that
Levin was aware of this. It was just for this fineness of
perception, for this delicacy, that Darya Alexandrovna
liked Levin.
‘I know, of course,’ said Levin, ‘that that simply means
that you would like to see me, and I’m exceedingly glad.
Though I can fancy that, used to town housekeeping as
you are, you must feel in the wilds here, and if there’s
anything wanted, I’m altogether at your disposal.’
Anna Karenina
583 of 1759
‘Oh, no!’ said Dolly. ‘At first things were rather
uncomfortable, but now we’ve settled everything
capitally— thanks to my old nurse,’ she said, indicating
Marya Philimonovna, who, seeing that they were speaking
of her, smiled brightly and cordially to Levin. She knew
him, and knew that he would be a good match for her
young lady, and was very keen to see the matter settled.
‘Won’t you get in, sir, we’ll make room this side!’ she
said to him.
‘No, I’ll walk. Children, who’d like to race the horses
with me?’ The children knew Levin very little, and could
not remember when they had seen him, but they
experienced in regard to him none of that strange feeling
of shyness and hostility which children so often experience
towards hypocritical, grown-up people, and for which
they are so often and miserably punished. Hypocrisy in
anything whatever may deceive the cleverest and most
penetrating man, but the least wide-awake of children
recognizes it, and is revolted by it, however ingeniously it
may be disguised. Whatever faults Levin had, there was
not a trace of hypocrisy in him, and so the children
showed him the same friendliness that they saw in their
mother’s face. On his invitation, the two elder ones at
once jumped out to him and ran with him as simply as
Anna Karenina
584 of 1759
they would have done with their nurse or Miss Hoole or
their mother. Lily, too, began begging to go to him, and
her mother handed her to him; he sat her on his shoulder
and ran along with her.
‘Don’t be afraid, don’t be afraid, Darya Alexandrovna!’
he said, smiling good-humoredly to the mother; ‘there’s
no chance of my hurting or dropping her.’
And, looking at his strong, agile, assiduously careful and
needlessly wary movements, the mother felt her mind at
rest, and smiled gaily and approvingly as she watched him.
Here, in the country, with children, and with Darya
Alexandrovna, with whom he was in sympathy, Levin was
in a mood not infrequent with him, of childlike lightheartedness that she particularly liked in him. As he ran
with the children, he taught them gymnastic feats, set Miss
Hoole laughing with his queer English accent, and talked
to Darya Alexandrovna of his pursuits in the country.
After dinner, Darya Alexandrovna, sitting alone with
him on the balcony, began to speak of Kitty.
‘You know, Kitty’s coming here, and is going to spend
the summer with me.’
‘Really,’ he said, flushing, and at once, to change the
conversation, he said: ‘Then I’ll send you two cows, shall
Anna Karenina
585 of 1759
I? If you insist on a bill you shall pay me five roubles a
month; but it’s really too bad of you.’
‘No, thank you. We can manage very well now.’
‘Oh, well, then, I’ll have a look at your cows, and if
you’ll allow me, I’ll give directions about their food.
Everything depends on their food.’
And Levin, to turn the conversation, explained to
Darya Alexandrovna the theory of cow-keeping, based on
the principle that the cow is simply a machine for the
transformation of food into milk, and so on.
He talked of this, and passionately longed to hear more
of Kitty, and, at the same time, was afraid of hearing it. He
dreaded the breaking up of the inward peace he had
gained with such effort.
‘Yes, but still all this has to be looked after, and who is
there to look after it?’ Darya Alexandrovna responded,
without interest.
She had by now got her household matters so
satisfactorily arranged, thanks to Marya Philimonovna, that
she was disinclined to make any change in them; besides,
she had no faith in Levin’s knowledge of farming. General
principles, as to the cow being a machine for the
production of milk, she looked on with suspicion. It
seemed to her that such principles could only be a
Anna Karenina
586 of 1759
hindrance in farm management. It all seemed to her a far
simpler matter: all that was needed, as Marya
Philimonovna had explained, was to give Brindle and
Whitebreast more food and drink, and not to let the cook
carry all the kitchen slops to the laundry maid’s cow. That
was clear. But general propositions as to feeding on meal
and on grass were doubtful and obscure. And, what was
most important, she wanted to talk about Kitty.
Anna Karenina
587 of 1759
Chapter 10
‘Kitty writes to me that there’s nothing she longs for so
much as quiet and solitude,’ Dolly said after the silence
that had followed.
‘And how is she—better?’ Levin asked in agitation.
‘Thank God, she’s quite well again. I never believed
her lungs were affected.’
‘Oh, I’m very glad!’ said Levin, and Dolly fancied she
saw something touching, helpless, in his face as he said this
and looked silently into her face.
‘Let me ask you, Konstantin Dmitrievitch,’ said Darya
Alexandrovna, smiling her kindly and rather mocking
smile, ‘why is it you are angry with Kitty?’
‘I? I’m not angry with her,’ said Levin.
‘Yes, you are angry. Why was it you did not come to
see us nor them when you were in Moscow?’
‘Darya Alexandrovna,’ he said, blushing up to the roots
of his hair, ‘I wonder really that with your kind heart you
don’t feel this. How it is you feel no pity for me, if
nothing else, when you know..’
‘What do I know?’
Anna Karenina
588 of 1759
‘You know I made an offer and that I was refused,’ said
Levin, and all the tenderness he had been feeling for Kitty
a minute before was replaced by a feeling of anger for the
slight he had suffered.
‘What makes you suppose I know?’
‘Because everybody knows it..’
‘That’s just where you are mistaken; I did not know it,
though I had guessed it was so.’
‘Well, now you know it.’
‘All I knew was that something had happened that
made her dreadfully miserable, and that she begged me
never to speak of it. And if she would not tell me, she
would certainly not speak of it to anyone else. But what
did pass between you? Tell me.’
‘I have told you.’
‘When was it?’
‘When I was at their house the last time.’
‘Do you know that,’ said Darya Alexandrovna, ‘I am
awfully, awfully sorry for her. You suffer only from
pride...’
‘Perhaps so,’ said Levin, ‘but..’
She interrupted him.
‘But she, poor girl...I am awfully, awfully sorry for her.
Now I see it all.’
Anna Karenina
589 of 1759
‘Well, Darya Alexandrovna, you must excuse me,’ he
said, getting up. ‘Good-bye, Darya Alexandrovna, till we
meet again.’
‘No, wait a minute,’ she said, clutching him by the
sleeve. ‘Wait a minute, sit down.’
‘Please, please, don’t let us talk of this,’ he said, sitting
down, and at the same time feeling rise up and stir within
his heart a hope he had believed to be buried.
‘If I did not like you,’ she said, and tears came into her
eyes; ‘if I did not know you, as I do know you . . .’
The feeling that had seemed dead revived more and
more, rose up and took possession of Levin’s heart.
‘Yes, I understand it all now,’ said Darya Alexandrovna.
‘You can’t understand it; for you men, who are free and
make your own choice, it’s always clear whom you love.
But a girl’s in a position of suspense, with all a woman’s or
maiden’s modesty, a girl who sees you men from afar, who
takes everything on trust,— a girl may have, and often has,
such a feeling that she cannot tell what to say.’
‘Yes, if the heart does not speak..’
‘No, the heart does speak; but just consider: you men
have views about a girl, you come to the house, you make
friends, you criticize, you wait to see if you have found
Anna Karenina
590 of 1759
what you love, and then, when you are sure you love her,
you make an offer...’
‘Well, that’s not quite it.’
‘Anyway you make an offer, when your love is ripe or
when the balance has completely turned between the two
you are choosing from. But a girl is not asked. She is
expected to make her choice, and yet she cannot choose,
she can only answer ‘yes’ or ‘no.’’
‘Yes, to choose between me and Vronsky,’ thought
Levin, and the dead thing that had come to life within
him died again, and only weighed on his heart and set it
aching.
‘Darya Alexandrovna,’ he said, ‘that’s how one chooses
a new dress or some purchase or other, not love. The
choice has been made, and so much the better.... And
there can be no repeating it.’
‘Ah, pride, pride!’ said Darya Alexandrovna, as though
despising him for the baseness of this feeling in comparison
with that other feeling which only women know. ‘At the
time when you made Kitty an offer she was just in a
position in which she could not answer. She was in doubt.
Doubt between you and Vronsky. Him she was seeing
every day, and you she had not seen for a long while.
Supposing she had been older...I, for instance, in her place
Anna Karenina
591 of 1759
could have felt no doubt. I always disliked him, and so it
has turned out.’
Levin recalled Kitty’s answer. She had said: ‘No, that
cannot be..’
‘Darya Alexandrovna,’ he said dryly, ‘I appreciate your
confidence in me; I believe you are making a mistake. But
whether I am right or wrong, that pride you so despise
makes any thought of Katerina Alexandrovna out of the
question for me,— you understand, utterly out of the
question.’
‘I will only say one thing more: you know that I am
speaking of my sister, whom I love as I love my own
children. I don’t say she cared for you, all I meant to say is
that her refusal at that moment proves nothing.’
‘I don’t know!’ said Levin, jumping up. ‘If you only
knew how you are hurting me. It’s just as if a child of
yours were dead, and they were to say to you: He would
have been like this and like that, and he might have lived,
and how happy you would have been in him. But he’s
dead, dead, dead!..’
‘How absurd you are!’ said Darya Alexandrovna,
looking with mournful tenderness at Levin’s excitement.
‘Yes, I see it all more and more clearly,’ she went on
Anna Karenina
592 of 1759
musingly. ‘So you won’t come to see us, then, when
Kitty’s here?’
‘No, I shan’t come. Of course I won’t avoid meeting
Katerina Alexandrovna, but as far as I can, I will try to
save her the annoyance of my presence.’
‘You are very, very absurd,’ repeated Darya
Alexandrovna, looking with tenderness into his face. ‘Very
well then, let it be as though we had not spoken of this.
What have you come for, Tanya?’ she said in French to
the little girl who had come in.
‘Where’s my spade, mamma?’
‘I speak French, and you must too.’
The little girl tried to say it in French, but could not
remember the French for spade; the mother prompted
her, and then told her in French where to look for the
spade. And this made a disagreeable impression on Levin.
Everything in Darya Alexandrovna’s house and
children struck him now as by no means so charming as a
little while before. ‘And what does she talk French with
the children for?’ he thought; ‘how unnatural and false it
is! And the children feel it so: Learning French and
unlearning sincerity,’ he thought to himself, unaware that
Darya Alexandrovna had thought all that over twenty
times already, and yet, even at the cost of some loss of
Anna Karenina
593 of 1759
sincerity, believed it necessary to teach her children
French in that way.
‘But why are you going? Do stay a little.’
Levin stayed to tea; but his good-humor had vanished,
and he felt ill at ease.
After tea he went out into the hall to order his horses
to be put in, and, when he came back, he found Darya
Alexandrovna greatly disturbed, with a troubled face, and
tears in her eyes. While Levin had been outside, an
incident had occurred which had utterly shattered all the
happiness she had been feeling that day, and her pride in
her children. Grisha and Tanya had been fighting over a
ball. Darya Alexandrovna, hearing a scream in the nursery,
ran in and saw a terrible sight. Tanya was pulling Grisha’s
hair, while he, with a face hideous with rage, was beating
her with his fists wherever he could get at her. Something
snapped in Darya Alexandrovna’s heart when she saw this.
It was as if darkness had swooped down upon her life; she
felt that these children of hers, that she was so proud of,
were not merely most ordinary, but positively bad, ill-bred
children, with coarse, brutal propensities—wicked
children.
She could not talk or think of anything else, and she
could not speak to Levin of her misery.
Anna Karenina
594 of 1759
Levin saw she was unhappy and tried to comfort her,
saying that it showed nothing bad, that all children fight;
but, even as he said it, he was thinking in his heart: ‘No, I
won’t be artificial and talk French with my children; but
my children won’t be like that. All one has to do is not
spoil children, not to distort their nature, and they’ll be
delightful. No, my children won’t be like that.’
He said good-bye and drove away, and she did not try
to keep him.
Anna Karenina
595 of 1759
Chapter 11
In the middle of July the elder of the village on Levin’s
sister’s estate, about fifteen miles from Pokrovskoe, came
to Levin to report on how things were going there and on
the hay. The chief source of income on his sister’s estate
was from the riverside meadows. In former years the hay
had been bought by the peasants for twenty roubles the
three acres. When Levin took over the management of the
estate, he thought on examining the grasslands that they
were worth more, and he fixed the price at twenty-five
roubles the three acres. The peasants would not give that
price, and, as Levin suspected, kept off other purchasers.
Then Levin had driven over himself, and arranged to have
the grass cut, partly by hired labor, partly at a payment of a
certain proportion of the crop. His own peasants put every
hindrance they could in the way of this new arrangement,
but it was carried out, and the first year the meadows had
yielded a profit almost double. The previous year—which
was the third year—the peasants had maintained the same
opposition to the arrangement, and the hay had been cut
on the same system. This year the peasants were doing all
the mowing for a third of the hay crop, and the village
Anna Karenina
596 of 1759
elder had come now to announce that the hay had been
cut, and that, fearing rain, they had invited the countinghouse clerk over, had divided the crop in his presence, and
had raked together eleven stacks as the owner’s share.
From the vague answers to his question how much hay
had been cut on the principal meadow, from the hurry of
the village elder who had made the division, not asking
leave, from the whole tone of the peasant, Levin perceived
that there was something wrong in the division of the hay,
and made up his mind to drive over himself to look into
the matter.
Arriving for dinner at the village, and leaving his horse
at the cottage of an old friend of his, the husband of his
brother’s wet-nurse, Levin went to see the old man in his
bee-house, wanting to find out from him the truth about
the hay. Parmenitch, a talkative, comely old man, gave
Levin a very warm welcome, showed him all he was
doing, told him everything about his bees and the swarms
of that year; but gave vague and unwilling answers to
Levin’s inquiries about the mowing. This confirmed Levin
still more in his suspicions. He went to the hay fields and
examined the stacks. The haystacks could not possibly
contain fifty wagon-loads each, and to convict the peasants
Levin ordered the wagons that had carried the hay to be
Anna Karenina
597 of 1759
brought up directly, to lift one stack, and carry it into the
barn. There turned out to be only thirty-two loads in the
stack. In spite of the village elder’s assertions about the
compressibility of hay, and its having settled down in the
stacks, and his swearing that everything had been done in
the fear of God, Levin stuck to his point that the hay had
been divided without his orders, and that, therefore, he
would not accept that hay as fifty loads to a stack. After a
prolonged dispute the matter was decided by the peasants
taking these eleven stacks, reckoning them as fifty loads
each. The arguments and the division of the haycocks
lasted the whole afternoon. When the last of the hay had
been divided, Levin, intrusting the superintendence of the
rest to the counting-house clerk, sat down on a haycock
marked off by a stake of willow, and looked admiringly at
the meadow swarming with peasants.
In front of him, in the bend of the river beyond the
marsh, moved a bright-colored line of peasant women,
and the scattered hay was being rapidly formed into gray
winding rows over the pale green stubble. After the
women came the men with pitchforks, and from the gray
rows there were growing up broad, high, soft haycocks.
To the left, carts were rumbling over the meadow that had
been already cleared, and one after another the haycocks
Anna Karenina
598 of 1759
vanished, flung up in huge forkfuls, and in their place
there were rising heavy cartloads of fragrant hay hanging
over the horses’ hind-quarters.
‘What weather for haying! What hay it’ll be!’ said an
old man, squatting down beside Levin. ‘It’s tea, not hay!
It’s like scattering grain to the ducks, the way they pick it
up!’ he added, pointing to the growing haycocks. ‘Since
dinnertime they’ve carried a good half of it.’
‘The last load, eh?’ he shouted to a young peasant, who
drove by, standing in the front of an empty cart, shaking
the cord reins.
‘The last, dad!’ the lad shouted back, pulling in the
horse, and, smiling, he looked round at a bright, rosychecked peasant girl who sat in the cart smiling too, and
drove on.
‘Who’s that? Your son?’ asked Levin.
‘My baby,’ said the old man with a tender smile.
‘What a fine fellow!’
‘The lad’s all right.’
‘Married already?’
‘Yes, it’s two years last St. Philip’s day.’
‘Any children?’
‘Children indeed! Why, for over a year he was
innocent as a babe himself, and bashful too,’ answered the
Anna Karenina
599 of 1759
old man. ‘Well, the hay! It’s as fragrant as tea!’ he
repeated, wishing to change the subject.
Levin looked more attentively at Ivan Parmenov and
his wife. They were loading a haycock onto the cart not
far from him. Ivan Parmenov was standing on the cart,
taking, laying in place, and stamping down the huge
bundles of hay, which his pretty young wife deftly handed
up to him, at first in armfuls, and then on the pitchfork.
The young wife worked easily, merrily, and dexterously.
The close-packed hay did not once break away off her
fork. First she gathered it together, stuck the fork into it,
then with a rapid, supple movement leaned the whole
weight of her body on it, and at once with a bend of her
back under the red belt she drew herself up, and arching
her full bosom under the white smock, with a smart turn
swung the fork in her arms, and flung the bundle of hay
high onto the cart. Ivan, obviously doing his best to save
her every minute of unnecessary labor, made haste,
opening his arms to clutch the bundle and lay it in the
cart. As she raked together what was left of the hay, the
young wife shook off the bits of hay that had fallen on her
neck, and straightening the red kerchief that had dropped
forward over her white brow, not browned like her face
by the sun, she crept under the cart to tie up the load.
Anna Karenina
600 of 1759
Ivan directed her how to fasten the cord to the crosspiece, and at something she said he laughed aloud. In the
expressions of both faces was to be seen vigorous, young,
freshly awakened love.
Anna Karenina
601 of 1759
Chapter 12
The load was tied on. Ivan jumped down and took the
quiet, sleek horse by the bridle. The young wife flung the
rake up on the load, and with a bold step, swinging her
arms, she went to join the women, who were forming a
ring for the haymakers’ dance. Ivan drove off to the road
and fell into line with the other loaded carts. The peasant
women, with their rakes on their shoulders, gay with
bright flowers, and chattering with ringing, merry voices,
walked behind the hay cart. One wild untrained female
voice broke into a song, and sang it alone through a verse,
and then the same verse was taken up and repeated by half
a hundred strong healthy voices, of all sorts, coarse and
fine, singing in unison.
The women, all singing, began to come close to Levin,
and he felt as though a storm were swooping down upon
him with a thunder of merriment. The storm swooped
down, enveloped him and the haycock on which he was
lying, and the other haycocks, and the wagon-loads, and
the whole meadow and distant fields all seemed to be
shaking and singing to the measures of this wild merry
song with its shouts and whistles and clapping. Levin felt
Anna Karenina
602 of 1759
envious of this health and mirthfulness; he longed to take
part in the expression of this joy of life. But he could do
nothing, and had to lie and look on and listen. When the
peasants, with their singing, had vanished out of sight and
hearing, a weary feeling of despondency at his own
isolation, his physical inactivity, his alienation from this
world, came over Levin.
Some of the very peasants who had been most active in
wrangling with him over the hay, some whom he had
treated with contumely, and who had tried to cheat him,
those very peasants had greeted him goodhumoredly, and
evidently had not, were incapable of having any feeling of
rancor against him, any regret, any recollection even of
having tried to deceive him. All that was drowned in a sea
of merry common labor. God gave the day, God gave the
strength. And the day and the strength were consecrated
to labor, and that labor was its own reward. For whom the
labor? What would be its fruits? These were idle
considerations— beside the point.
Often Levin had admired this life, often he had a sense
of envy of the men who led this life; but today for the first
time, especially under the influence of what he had seen in
the attitude of Ivan Parmenov to his young wife, the idea
presented itself definitely to his mind that it was in his
Anna Karenina
603 of 1759
power to exchange the dreary, artificial, idle, and
individualistic life he was leading for this laborious, pure,
and socially delightful life.
The old man who had been sitting beside him had long
ago gone home; the people had all separated. Those who
lived near had gone home, while those who came from far
were gathered into a group for supper, and to spend the
night in the meadow. Levin, unobserved by the peasants,
still lay on the haycock, and still looked on and listened
and mused. The peasants who remained for the night in
the meadow scarcely slept all the short summer night. At
first there was the sound of merry talk and laughing all
together over the supper, then singing again and laughter.
All the long day of toil had left no trace in them but
lightness of heart. Before the early dawn all was hushed.
Nothing was to be heard but the night sounds of the frogs
that never ceased in the marsh, and the horses snorting in
the mist that rose over the meadow before the morning.
Rousing himself, Levin got up from the haycock, and
looking at the stars, he saw that the night was over.
‘Well, what am I going to do? How am I to set about
it?’ he said to himself, trying to express to himself all the
thoughts and feelings he had passed through in that brief
night. All the thoughts and feelings he had passed through
Anna Karenina
604 of 1759
fell into three separate trains of thought. One was the
renunciation of his old life, of his utterly useless education.
This renunciation gave him satisfaction, and was easy and
simple. Another series of thoughts and mental images
related to the life he longed to live now. The simplicity,
the purity, the sanity of this life he felt clearly, and he was
convinced he would find in it the content, the peace, and
the dignity, of the lack of which he was so miserably
conscious. But a third series of ideas turned upon the
question how to effect this transition from the old life to
the new. And there nothing took clear shape for him.
‘Have a wife? Have work and the necessity of work?
Leave Pokrovskoe? Buy land? Become a member of a
peasant community? Marry a peasant girl? How am I to set
about it?’ he asked himself again, and could not find an
answer. ‘I haven’t slept all night, though, and I can’t think
it out clearly,’ he said to himself. ‘I’ll work it out later.
One thing’s certain, this night has decided my fate. All my
old dreams of home life were absurd, not the real thing,’
he told himself. ‘It’s all ever so much simpler and better..’
‘How beautiful!’ he thought, looking at the strange, as
it were, mother-of-pearl shell of white fleecy cloudless
resting right over his head in the middle of the sky. ‘How
exquisite it all is in this exquisite night! And when was
Anna Karenina
605 of 1759
there time for that cloud-shell to form? Just now I looked
at the sky, and there was nothing in it—only two white
streaks. Yes, and so imperceptibly too my views of life
changed!’
He went out of the meadow and walked along the
highroad towards the village. A slight wind arose, and the
sky looked gray and sullen. The gloomy moment had
come that usually precedes the dawn, the full triumph of
light over darkness.
Shrinking from the cold, Levin walked rapidly, looking
at the ground. ‘What’s that? Someone coming,’ he
thought, catching the tinkle of bells, and lifting his head.
Forty paces from him a carriage with four horses harnessed
abreast was driving towards him along the grassy road on
which he was walking. The shaft-horses were tilted against
the shafts by the ruts, but the dexterous driver sitting on
the box held the shaft over the ruts, so that the wheels ran
on the smooth part of the road.
This was all Levin noticed, and without wondering
who it could be, he gazed absently at the coach.
In the coach was an old lady dozing in one corner, and
at the window, evidently only just awake, sat a young girl
holding in both hands the ribbons of a white cap. With a
face full of light and thought, full of a subtle, complex
Anna Karenina
606 of 1759
inner life, that was remote from Levin, she was gazing
beyond him at the glow of the sunrise.
At the very instant when this apparition was vanishing,
the truthful eyes glanced at him. She recognized him, and
her face lighted up with wondering delight.
He could not be mistaken. There were no other eyes
like those in the world. There was only one creature in
the world that could concentrate for him all the brightness
and meaning of life. It was she. It was Kitty. He
understood that she was driving to Ergushovo from the
railway station. And everything that had been stirring
Levin during that sleepless night, all the resolutions he had
made, all vanished at once. He recalled with horror his
dreams of marrying a peasant girl. There only, in the
carriage that had crossed over to the other side of the road,
and was rapidly disappearing, there only could he find the
solution of the riddle of his life, which had weighed so
agonizingly upon him of late.
She did not look out again. The sound of the carriagesprings was no longer audible, the bells could scarcely be
heard. The barking of dogs showed the carriage had
reached the village, and all that was left was the empty
fields all round, the village in front, and he himself isolated
Anna Karenina
607 of 1759
and apart from it all, wandering lonely along the deserted
highroad.
He glanced at the sky, expecting to find there the cloud
shell he had been admiring and taking as the symbol of the
ideas and feelings of that night. There was nothing in the
sky in the least like a shell. There, in the remote heights
above, a mysterious change had been accomplished. There
was no trace of shell, and there was stretched over fully
half the sky an even cover of tiny and ever tinier cloudlets.
The sky had grown blue and bright; and with the same
softness, but with the same remoteness, it met his
questioning gaze.
‘No,’ he said to himself, ‘however good that life of
simplicity and toil may be, I cannot go back to it. I love
HER.’
Anna Karenina
608 of 1759
Chapter 13
None but those who were most intimate with Alexey
Alexandrovitch knew that, while on the surface the
coldest and most reasonable of men, he had one weakness
quite opposed to the general trend of his character. Alexey
Alexandrovitch could not hear or see a child or woman
crying without being moved. The sight of tears threw him
into a state of nervous agitation, and he utterly lost all
power of reflection. The chief secretary of his department
and his private secretary were aware of this, and used to
warn women who came with petitions on no account to
give way to tears, if they did not want to ruin their
chances. ‘He will get angry, and will not listen to you,’
they used to say. And as a fact, in such cases the emotional
disturbance set up in Alexey Alexandrovitch by the sight
of tears found expression in hasty anger. ‘I can do nothing.
Kindly leave the room!’ he would commonly cry in such
cases.
When returning from the races Anna had informed him
of her relations with Vronsky, and immediately afterwards
had burst into tears, hiding her face in her hands, Alexey
Alexandrovitch, for all the fury aroused in him against her,
Anna Karenina
609 of 1759
was aware at the same time of a rush of that emotional
disturbance always produced in him by tears. Conscious of
it, and conscious that any expression of his feelings at that
minute would be out of keeping with the position, he
tried to suppress every manifestation of life in himself, and
so neither stirred nor looked at her. This was what had
caused that strange expression of deathlike rigidity in his
face which had so impressed Anna.
When they reached the house he helped her to get out
of the carriage, and making an effort to master himself,
took leave of her with his usual urbanity, and uttered that
phrase that bound him to nothing; he said that tomorrow
he would let her know his decision.
His wife’s words, confirming his worst suspicions, had
sent a cruel pang to the heart of Alexey Alexandrovitch.
That pang was intensified by the strange feeling of physical
pity for her set up by her tears. But when he was all alone
in the carriage Alexey Alexandrovitch, to his surprise and
delight, felt complete relief both from this pity and from
the doubts and agonies of jealousy.
He experienced the sensations of a man who has had a
tooth out after suffering long from toothache. After a
fearful agony and a sense of something huge, bigger than
the head itself, being torn out of his jaw, the sufferer,
Anna Karenina
610 of 1759
hardly able to believe in his own good luck, feels all at
once that what has so long poisoned his existence and
enchained his attention, exists no longer, and that he can
live and think again, and take interest in other things
besides his tooth. This feeling Alexey Alexandrovitch was
experiencing. The agony had been strange and terrible,
but now it was over; he felt that he could live again and
think of something other than his wife.
‘No honor, no heart, no religion; a corrupt woman. I
always knew it and always saw it, though I tried to deceive
myself to spare her,’ he said to himself. And it actually
seemed to him that he always had seen it: he recalled
incidents of their past life, in which he had never seen
anything wrong before—now these incidents proved
clearly that she had always been a corrupt woman. ‘I made
a mistake in linking my life to hers; but there was nothing
wrong in my mistake, and so I cannot be unhappy. It’s not
I that am to blame,’ he told himself, ‘but she. But I have
nothing to do with her. She does not exist for me..’
Everything relating to her and her son, towards whom
his sentiments were as much changed as towards her,
ceased to interest him. The only thing that interested him
now was the question of in what way he could best, with
most propriety and comfort for himself, and thus with
Anna Karenina
611 of 1759
most justice, extricate himself from the mud with which
she had spattered him in her fall, and then proceed along
his path of active, honorable, and useful existence.
‘I cannot be made unhappy by the fact that a
contemptible woman has committed a crime. I have only
to find the best way out of the difficult position in which
she has placed me. And I shall find it,’ he said to himself,
frowning more and more. ‘I’m not the first nor the last.’
And to say nothing of historical instances dating from the
‘Fair Helen’ of Menelaus, recently revived in the memory
of all, a whole list of contemporary examples of husbands
with unfaithful wives in the highest society rose before
Alexey Alexandrovitch’s imagination. ‘Daryalov,
Poltavsky, Prince Karibanov, Count Paskudin, Dram....
Yes, even Dram, such an honest, capable
fellow...Semyonov, Tchagin, Sigonin,’ Alexey
Alexandrovitch remembered. ‘Admitting that a certain
quite irrational ridicule falls to the lot of these men, yet I
never saw anything but a misfortune in it, and always felt
sympathy for it,’ Alexey Alexandrovitch said to himself,
though indeed this was not the fact, and he had never felt
sympathy for misfortunes of that kind, but the more
frequently he had heard of instances of unfaithful wives
betraying their husbands, the more highly he had thought
Anna Karenina
612 of 1759
of himself. ‘It is a misfortune which may befall anyone.
And this misfortune has befallen me. The only thing to be
done is to make the best of the position.’
And he began passing in review the methods of
proceeding of men who had been in the same position
that he was in.
‘Daryalov fought a duel...’
The duel had particularly fascinated the thoughts of
Alexey Alexandrovitch in his youth, just because he was
physically a coward, and was himself well aware of the
fact. Alexey Alexandrovitch could not without horror
contemplate the idea of a pistol aimed at himself, and
never made use of any weapon in his life. This horror had
in his youth set him pondering on dueling, and picturing
himself in a position in which he would have to expose his
life to danger. Having attained success and an established
position in the world, he had long ago forgotten this
feeling; but the habitual bent of feeling reasserted itself,
and dread of his own cowardice proved even now so
strong that Alexey Alexandrovitch spent a long while
thinking over the question of dueling in all its aspects, and
hugging the idea of a duel, though he was fully aware
beforehand that he would never under any circumstances
fight one.
Anna Karenina
613 of 1759
‘There’s no doubt our society is still so barbarous (it’s
not the same in England) that very many’—and among
these were those whose opinion Alexey Alexandrovitch
particularly valued—‘look favorably on the duel; but what
result is attained by it? Suppose I call him out,’ Alexey
Alexandrovitch went on to himself, and vividly picturing
the night he would spend after the challenge, and the
pistol aimed at him, he shuddered, and knew that he never
would do it—‘suppose I call him out. Suppose I am
taught,’ he went on musing, ‘to shoot; I press the trigger,’
he said to himself, closing his eyes, ‘and it turns out I have
killed him,’ Alexey Alexandrovitch said to himself, and he
shook his head as though to dispel such silly ideas. ‘What
sense is there in murdering a man in order to define one’s
relation to a guilty wife and son? I should still just as much
have to decide what I ought to do with her. But what is
more probable and what would doubtless occur—I should
be killed or wounded. I, the innocent person, should be
the victim—killed or wounded. It’s even more senseless.
But apart from that, a challenge to fight would be an act
hardly honest on my side. Don’t I know perfectly well
that my friends would never allow me to fight a duel—
would never allow the life of a statesman, needed by
Russia, to be exposed to danger? Knowing perfectly well
Anna Karenina
614 of 1759
beforehand that the matter would never come to real
danger, it would amount to my simply trying to gain a
certain sham reputation by such a challenge. That would
be dishonest, that would be false, that would be deceiving
myself and others. A duel is quite irrational, and no one
expects it of me. My aim is simply to safeguard my
reputation, which is essential for the uninterrupted pursuit
of my public duties.’ Official duties, which had always
been of great consequence in Alexey Alexandrovitch’s
eyes, seemed of special importance to his mind at this
moment. Considering and rejecting the duel, Alexey
Alexandrovitch turned to divorce—another solution
selected by several of the husbands he remembered.
Passing in mental review all the instances he knew of
divorces (there were plenty of them in the very highest
society with which he was very familiar), Alexey
Alexandrovitch could not find a single example in which
the object of divorce was that which he had in view. In all
these instances the husband had practically ceded or sold
his unfaithful wife, and the very party which, being in
fault, had not the right to contract a fresh marriage, had
formed counterfeit, pseudo-matrimonial ties with a selfstyled husband. In his own case, Alexey Alexandrovitch
saw that a legal divorce, that is to say, one in which only
Anna Karenina
615 of 1759
the guilty wife would be repudiated, was impossible of
attainment. He saw that the complex conditions of the life
they led made the coarse proofs of his wife’s guilt,
required by the law, out of the question; he saw that a
certain refinement in that life would not admit of such
proofs being brought forward, even if he had them, and
that to bring forward such proofs would damage him in
the public estimation more than it would her.
An attempt at divorce could lead to nothing but a
public scandal, which would be a perfect godsend to his
enemies for calumny and attacks on his high position in
society. His chief object, to define the position with the
least amount of disturbance possible, would not be
attained by divorce either. Moreover, in the event of
divorce, or even of an attempt to obtain a divorce, it was
obvious that the wife broke off all relations with the
husband and threw in her lot with the lover. And in spite
of the complete, as he supposed, contempt and
indifference he now felt for his wife, at the bottom of his
heart, Alexey Alexandrovitch still had one feeling left in
regard to her—a disinclination to see her free to throw in
her lot with Vronsky, so that her crime would be to her
advantage. The mere notion of this so exasperated Alexey
Alexandrovitch, that directly it rose to his mind he
Anna Karenina
616 of 1759
groaned with inward agony, and got up and changed his
place in the carriage, and for a long while after, he sat with
scowling brows, wrapping his numbed and bony legs in
the fleecy rug.
‘Apart from formal divorce, One might still do like
Karibanov, Paskudin, and that good fellow Dram—that is,
separate from one’s wife,’ he went on thinking, when he
had regained his composure. But this step too presented
the same drawback of public scandal as a divorce, and
what was more, a separation, quite as much as a regular
divorce, flung his wife into the arms of Vronsky. ‘No, it’s
out of the question, out of the question!’ he said again,
twisting his rug about him again. ‘I cannot be unhappy,
but neither she nor he ought to be happy.’
The feeling of jealousy, which had tortured him during
the period of uncertainty, had passed away at the instant
when the tooth had been with agony extracted by his
wife’s words. But that feeling had been replaced by
another, the desire, not merely that she should not be
triumphant, but that she should get due punishment for
her crime. He did not acknowledge this feeling, but at the
bottom of his heart he longed for her to suffer for having
destroyed his peace of mind—his honor. And going once
again over the conditions inseparable from a duel, a
Anna Karenina
617 of 1759
divorce, a separation, and once again rejecting them,
Alexey Alexandrovitch felt convinced that there was only
one solution,—to keep her with him, concealing what had
happened from the world, and using every measure in his
power to break off the intrigue, and still more—though
this he did not admit to himself—to punish her. ‘I must
inform her of my conclusion, that thinking over the
terrible position in which she has placed her family, all
other solutions will be worse for both sides than an
external status quo, and that such I agree to retain, on the
strict condition of obedience on her part to my wishes,
that is to say, cessation of all intercourse with her lover.’
When this decision had been finally adopted, another
weighty consideration occurred to Alexey
Alexandrovitch in support of it. ‘By such a course only
shall I be acting in accordance with the dictates of
religion,’ he told himself. ‘In adopting this course, I am
not casting off a guilty wife, but giving her a chance of
amendment; and, indeed, difficult as the task will be to
me, I shall devote part of my energies to her reformation
and salvation.’
Though Alexey Alexandrovitch was perfectly aware
that he could not exert any moral influence over his wife,
that such an attempt at reformation could lead to nothing
Anna Karenina
618 of 1759
but falsity; though in passing through these difficult
moments he had not once thought of seeking guidance in
religion, yet now, when his conclusion corresponded, as it
seemed to him, with the requirements of religion, this
religious sanction to his decision gave him complete
satisfaction, and to some extent restored his peace of mind.
He was pleased to think that, even in such an important
crisis in life, no one would be able to say that he had not
acted in accordance with the principles of that religion
whose banner he had always held aloft amid the general
coolness and indifference. As he pondered over subsequent
developments, Alexey Alexandrovitch did not see, indeed,
why his relations with his wife should not remain
practically the same as before. No doubt, she could never
regain his esteem, but there was not, and there could not
be, any sort of reason that his existence should be
troubled, and that he should suffer because she was a bad
and faithless wife. ‘Yes, time will pass; time, which
arranges all things, and the old relations will be
reestablished,’ Alexey Alexandrovitch told himself; ‘so far
reestablished, that is, that I shall not be sensible of a break
in the continuity of my life. She is bound to be unhappy,
but I am not to blame, and so I cannot be unhappy.’
Anna Karenina
619 of 1759
Chapter 14
As he neared Petersburg, Alexey Alexandrovitch not
only adhered entirely to his decision, but was even
composing in his head the letter he would write to his
wife. Going into the porter’s room, Alexey
Alexandrovitch glanced at the letters and papers brought
from his office, and directed that they should be brought
to him in his study.
‘The horses can be taken out and I will see no one,’ he
said in answer to the porter, with a certain pleasure,
indicative of his agreeable frame of mind, emphasizing the
words, ‘see no one.’
In his study Alexey Alexandrovitch walked up and
down twice, and stopped at an immense writing-table, on
which six candles had already been lighted by the valet
who had preceded him. He cracked his knuckles and sat
down, sorting out his writing appurtenances. Putting his
elbows on the table, he bent his head on one side, thought
a minute, and began to write, without pausing for a
second. He wrote without using any form of address to
her, and wrote in French, making use of the plural ‘vous,’
Anna Karenina
620 of 1759
which has not the same note of coldness as the
corresponding Russian form.
‘At our last conversation, I notified you of my intention
to communicate to you my decision in regard to the
subject of that conversation. Having carefully considered
everything, I am writing now with the object of fulfilling
that promise. My decision is as follows. Whatever your
conduct may have been, I do not consider myself justified
in breaking the ties in which we are bound by a Higher
Power. The family cannot be broken up by a whim, a
caprice, or even by the sin of one of the partners in the
marriage, and our life must go on as it has done in the
past. This is essential for me, for you, and for our son. I
am fully persuaded that you have repented and do repent
of what has called forth the present letter, and that you
will cooperate with me in eradicating the cause of our
estrangement, and forgetting the past. In the contrary
event, you can conjecture what awaits you and your son.
All this I hope to discuss more in detail in a personal
interview. As the season is drawing to a close, I would beg
you to return to Petersburg as quickly as possible, not later
than Tuesday. All necessary preparations shall be made for
your arrival here. I beg you to note that I attach particular
significance to compliance with this request.
Anna Karenina
621 of 1759
A. Karenin
‘P.S.—I enclose the money which may be needed for
your expenses.’
He read the letter through and felt pleased with it, and
especially that he had remembered to enclose money:
there was not a harsh word, not a reproach in it, nor was
there undue indulgence. Most of all, it was a golden
bridge for return. Folding the letter and smoothing it with
a massive ivory knife, and putting it in an envelope with
the money, he rang the bell with the gratification it always
afforded him to use the well arranged appointments of his
writing-table.
‘Give this to the courier to be delivered to Anna
Arkadyevna tomorrow at the summer villa,’ he said,
getting up.
‘Certainly, your excellency; tea to be served in the
study?’
Alexey Alexandrovitch ordered tea to be brought to
the study, and playing with the massive paper-knife, he
moved to his easy chair, near which there had been placed
ready for him a lamp and the French work on Egyptian
hieroglyphics that he had begun. Over the easy chair there
hung in a gold frame an oval portrait of Anna, a fine
painting by a celebrated artist. Alexey Alexandrovitch
Anna Karenina
622 of 1759
glanced at it. The unfathomable eyes gazed ironically and
insolently at him. Insufferably insolent and challenging was
the effect in Alexey Alexandrovitch’s eyes of the black lace
about the head, admirably touched in by the painter, the
black hair and handsome white hand with one finger
lifted, covered with rings. After looking at the portrait for
a minute, Alexey Alexandrovitch shuddered so that his lips
quivered and he uttered the sound ‘brrr,’ and turned away.
He made haste to sit down in his easy chair and opened
the book. He tried to read, but he could not revive the
very vivid interest he had felt before in Egyptian
hieroglyphics. He looked at the book and thought of
something else. He thought not of his wife, but of a
complication that had arisen in his official life, which at
the time constituted the chief interest of it. He felt that he
had penetrated more deeply than ever before into this
intricate affair, and that he had originated a leading idea—
he could say it without self-flattery—calculated to clear up
the whole business, to strengthen him in his official career,
to discomfit his enemies, and thereby to be of the greatest
benefit to the government. Directly the servant had set the
tea and left the room, Alexey Alexandrovitch got up and
went to the writing-table. Moving into the middle of the
table a portfolio of papers, with a scarcely perceptible smile
Anna Karenina
623 of 1759
of self-satisfaction, he took a pencil from a rack and
plunged into the perusal of a complex report relating to
the present complication. The complication was of this
nature: Alexey Alexandrovitch’s characteristic quality as a
politician, that special individual qualification that every
rising functionary possesses, the qualification that with his
unflagging ambition, his reserve, his honesty, and with his
self-confidence had made his career, was his contempt for
red tape, his cutting down of correspondence, his direct
contact, wherever possible, with the living fact, and his
economy. It happened that the famous Commission of the
2nd of June had set on foot an inquiry into the irrigation
of lands in the Zaraisky province, which fell under Alexey
Alexandrovitch’s department, and was a glaring example of
fruitless expenditure and paper reforms. Alexey
Alexandrovitch was aware of the truth of this. The
irrigation of these lands in the Zaraisky province had been
initiated by the predecessor of Alexey Alexandrovitch’s
predecessor. And vast sums of money had actually been
spent and were still being spent on this business, and
utterly unproductively, and the whole business could
obviously lead to nothing whatever. Alexey
Alexandrovitch had perceived this at once on entering
office, and would have liked to lay hands on the Board of
Anna Karenina
624 of 1759
Irrigation. But at first, when he did not yet feel secure in
his position, he knew it would affect too many interests,
and would be injudicious. Later on he had been engrossed
in other questions, and had simply forgotten the Board of
Irrigation. It went of itself, like all such boards, by the
mere force of inertia. (Many people gained their
livelihood by the Board of Irrigation, especially one highly
conscientious and musical family: all the daughters played
on stringed instruments, and Alexey Alexandrovitch knew
the family and had stood godfather to one of the elder
daughters.) The raising of this question by a hostile
department was in Alexey Alexandrovitch’s opinion a
dishonorable proceeding, seeing that in every department
there were things similar and worse, which no one
inquired into, for well-known reasons of official etiquette.
However, now that the glove had been thrown down to
him, he had boldly picked it up and demanded the
appointment of a special commission to investigate and
verify the working of the Board of Irrigation of the lands
in the Zaraisky province. But in compensation he gave no
quarter to the enemy either. He demanded the
appointment of another special commission to inquire into
the question of the Native Tribes Organization
Committee. The question of the Native Tribes had been
Anna Karenina
625 of 1759
brought up incidentally in the Commission of the 2nd of
June, and had been pressed forward actively by Alexey
Alexandrovitch as one admitting of no delay on account of
the deplorable condition bf the native tribes. In the
commission this question had been a ground of contention
between several departments. The department hostile to
Alexey Alexandrovitch proved that the condition of the
native tribes was exceedingly flourishing, that the
proposed reconstruction might be the ruin of their
prosperity, and that if there were anything wrong, it arose
mainly from the failure on the part of Alexey
Alexandrovitch’s department to carry out the measures
prescribed by law. Now Alexey Alexandrovitch intended
to demand: First, that a new commission should be formed
which should be empowered to investigate the condition
of the native tribes on the spot; secondly, if it should
appear that the condition of the native tribes actually was
such as it appeared to be from the official documents in
the hands of the committee, that another new scientific
commission should be appointed to investigate the
deplorable condition of the native tribes from the—(1)
political, (2) administrative, (3) economic, (4)
ethnographical, (5) material, and (6) religious points of
view; thirdly, that evidence should be required from the
Anna Karenina
626 of 1759
rival department of the measures that had been taken
during the last ten years by that department for averting
the disastrous conditions in which the native tribes were
now placed; and fourthly and finally, that that department
explain why it had, as appeared from the evidence before
the committee, from No. 17,015 and 18,038, from
December 5, 1863, and June 7, 1864, acted in direct
contravention of the intent of the law T...Act 18, and the
note to Act 36. A flash of eagerness suffused the face of
Alexey Alexandrovitch as he rapidly wrote out a synopsis
of these ideas for his own benefit. Having filled a sheet of
paper, he got up, rang, and sent a note to the chief
secretary of his department to look up certain necessary
facts for him. Getting up and walking about the room, he
glanced again at the portrait, frowned, and smiled
contemptuously. After reading a little more of the book
on Egyptian hieroglyphics, and renewing his interest in it,
Alexey Alexandrovitch went to bed at eleven o’clock, and
recollecting as he lay in bed the incident with his wife, he
saw it now in by no means such a gloomy light.
Anna Karenina
627 of 1759
Chapter 15
Though Anna had obstinately and with exasperation
contradicted Vronsky when he told her their position was
impossible, at the bottom of her heart she regarded her
own position as false and dishonorable, and she longed
with her whole soul to change it. On the way home from
the races she had told her husband the truth in a moment
of excitement, and in spite of the agony she had suffered
in doing so, she was glad of it. After her husband had left
her, she told herself that she was glad, that now everything
was made clear, and at least there would be no more lying
and deception. It seemed to her beyond doubt that her
position was now made clear forever. It might be bad, this
new position, but it would be clear; there would be no
indefiniteness or falsehood about it. The pain she had
caused herself and her husband in uttering those words
would be rewarded now by everything being made clear,
she thought. That evening she saw Vronsky, but she did
not tell him of what had passed between her and her
husband, though, to make the position definite, it was
necessary to tell him.
Anna Karenina
628 of 1759
When she woke up next morning the first thing that
rose to her mind was what she had said to her husband,
and those words seemed to her so awful that she could not
conceive now how she could have brought herself to utter
those strange, coarse words, and could not imagine what
would come of it. But the words were spoken, and Alexey
Alexandrovitch had gone away without saying anything. ‘I
saw Vronsky and did not tell him. At the very instant he
was going away I would have turned him back and told
him, but I changed my mind, because it was strange that I
had not told him the first minute. Why was it I wanted to
tell him and did not tell him?’ And in answer to this
question a burning blush of shame spread over her face.
She knew what had kept her from it, she knew that she
had been ashamed. Her position, which had seemed to her
simplified the night before, suddenly struck her now as not
only not simple, but as absolutely hopeless. She felt
terrified at the disgrace, of which she had not ever thought
before. Directly she thought of what her husband would
do, the most terrible ideas came to her mind. She had a
vision of being turned out of the house, of her shame
being proclaimed to all the world. She asked herself where
she should go when she was turned out of the house, and
she could not find an answer.
Anna Karenina
629 of 1759
When she thought of Vronsky, it seemed to her that he
did not love her, that he was already beginning to be tired
of her, that she could not offer herself to him, and she felt
bitter against him for it. It seemed to her that the words
that she had spoken to her husband, and had continually
repeated in her imagination, she had said to everyone, and
everyone had heard them. She could not bring herself to
look those of her own household in the face. She could
not bring herself to call her maid, and still less go
downstairs and see her son and his governess.
The maid, who had been listening at her door for a
long while, came into her room of her own accord. Anna
glanced inquiringly into her face, and blushed with a
scared look. The maid begged her pardon for coming in,
saying that she had fancied the bell rang. She brought her
clothes and a note. The note was from Betsy. Betsy
reminded her that Liza Merkalova and Baroness Shtoltz
were coming to play croquet with her that morning with
their adorers, Kaluzhsky and old Stremov. ‘Come, if only
as a study in morals. I shall expect you,’ she finished.
Anna read the note and heaved a deep sigh.
‘Nothing, I need nothing,’ she said to Annushka, who
was rearranging the bottles and brushes on the dressing
Anna Karenina
630 of 1759
table. ‘You can go. I’ll dress at once and come down. I
need nothing.’
Annushka went out, but Anna did not begin dressing,
and sat in the same position, her head and hands hanging
listlessly, and every now and then she shivered all over,
seemed as though she would make some gesture, utter
some word, and sank back into lifelessness again. She
repeated continually, ‘My God! my God!’ But neither
‘God’ nor ‘my’ had any meaning to her. The idea of
seeking help in her difficulty in religion was as remote
from her as seeking help from Alexey Alexandrovitch
himself, although she had never had doubts of the faith in
which she had been brought up. She knew that the
support of religion was possible only upon condition of
renouncing what made up for her the whole meaning of
life. She was not simply miserable, she began to feel alarm
at the new spiritual condition, never experienced before,
in which she found herself. She felt as though everything
were beginning to be double in her soul, just as objects
sometimes appear double to over-tired eyes. She hardly
knew at times what it was she feared, and what she hoped
for. Whether she feared or desired what had happened, or
what was going to happen, and exactly what she longed
for, she could not have said.
Anna Karenina
631 of 1759
‘Ah, what am I doing!’ she said to herself, feeling a
sudden thrill of pain in both sides of her head. When she
came to herself, she saw that she was holding her hair in
both hands, each side of her temples, and pulling it. She
jumped up, and began walking about.
‘The coffee is ready, and mademoiselle and Seryozha
are waiting,’ said Annushka, coming back again and
finding Anna in the same position.
‘Seryozha? What about Seryozha?’ Anna asked, with
sudden eagerness, recollecting her son’s existence for the
first time that morning.
‘He’s been naughty, I think,’ answered Annushka with
a smile.
‘In what way?’
‘Some peaches were lying on the table in the corner
room. I think he slipped in and ate one of them on the
sly.’
The recollection of her son suddenly roused Anna from
the helpless condition in which she found herself. She
recalled the partly sincere, though greatly exaggerated, role
of the mother living for her child, which she had taken up
of late years, and she felt with joy that in the plight in
which she found herself she had a support, quite apart
from her relation to her husband or to Vronsky. This
Anna Karenina
632 of 1759
support was her son. In whatever position she might be
placed, she could not lose her son. Her husband might put
her to shame and turn her out, Vronsky might grow cold
to her and go on living his own life apart (she thought of
him again with bitterness and reproach); she could not
leave her son. She had an aim in life. And she must act; act
to secure this relation to her son, so that he might not be
taken from her. Quickly indeed, as quickly as possible, she
must take action before he was taken from her. She must
take her son and go away. Here was the one thing she had
to do now. She needed consolation. She must be calm,
and get out of this insufferable position. The thought of
immediate action binding her to her son, of going away
somewhere with him, gave her this consolation.
She dressed quickly, went downstairs, and with resolute
steps walked into the drawing room, where she found, as
usual, waiting for her, the coffee, Seryozha, and his
governess. Seryozha, all in white, with his back and head
bent, was standing at a table under a looking-glass, and
with an expression of intense concentration which she
knew well, and in which he resembled his father, he was
doing something to the flowers he carried.
The governess had a particularly severe expression.
Seryozha screamed shrilly, as he often did, ‘Ah, mamma!’
Anna Karenina
633 of 1759
and stopped, hesitating whether to go to greet his mother
and put down the flowers, or to finish making the wreath
and go with the flowers.
The governess, after saying good-morning, began a
long and detailed account of Seryozha’s naughtiness, but
Anna did not hear her; she was considering whether she
would take her with her or not. ‘No, I won’t take her,’
she decided. ‘I’ll go alone with my child.’
‘Yes, it’s very wrong,’ said Anna, and taking her son by
the shoulder she looked at him, not severely, but with a
timid glance that bewildered and delighted the boy, and
she kissed him. ‘Leave him to me,’ she said to the
astonished governess, and not letting go of her son, she sat
down at the table, where coffee was set ready for her.
‘Mamma! I...I...didn’t...’ he said, trying to make out
from her expression what was in store for him in regard to
the peaches.
‘Seryozha,’ she said, as soon as the governess had left
the room, ‘that was wrong, but you’ll never do it again,
will you?... You love me?’
She felt that the tears were coming into her eyes. ‘Can
I help loving him?’ she said to herself, looking deeply into
his scared and at the same time delighted eyes. ‘And can
he ever join his father in punishing me? Is it possible he
Anna Karenina
634 of 1759
will not feel for me?’ Tears were already flowing down
her face, and to hide them she got up abruptly and almost
ran out on to the terrace.
After the thunder showers of the last few days, cold,
bright weather had set in. The air was cold in the bright
sun that filtered through the freshly washed leaves.
She shivered, both from the cold and from the inward
horror which had clutched her with fresh force in the
open air.
‘Run along, run along to Mariette,’ she said to
Seryozha, who had followed her out, and she began
walking up and down on the straw matting of the terrace.
‘Can it be that they won’t forgive me, won’t understand
how it all couldn’t be helped?’ she said to herself.
Standing still, and looking at the tops of the aspen trees
waving in the wind, with their freshly washed, brightly
shining leaves in the cold sunshine, she knew that they
would not forgive her, that everyone and everything
would be merciless to her now as was that sky, that green.
And again she felt that everything was split in two in her
soul. ‘I mustn’t, mustn’t think,’ she said to herself. ‘I must
get ready. To go where? When? Whom to take with me?
Yes, to Moscow by the evening train. Annushka and
Seryozha, and only the most necessary things. But first I
Anna Karenina
635 of 1759
must write to them both.’ She went quickly indoors into
her boudoir, sat down at the table, and wrote to her
husband:—‘After what has happened, I cannot remain any
longer in your house. I am going away, and taking my son
with me. I don’t know the law, and so I don’t know with
which of the parents the son should remain; but I take him
with me because I cannot live without him. Be generous,
leave him to me.’
Up to this point she wrote rapidly and naturally, but
the appeal to his generosity, a quality she did not
recognize in him, and the necessity of winding up the
letter with something touching, pulled her up. ‘Of my
fault and my remorse I cannot speak, because..’
She stopped again, finding no connection in her
ideas.’No,’ she said to herself, ‘there’s no need of
anything,’ and tearing up the letter, she wrote it again,
leaving out the allusion to generosity, and sealed it up.
Another letter had to be written to Vronsky. ‘I have
told my husband,’ she wrote, and she sat a long while
unable to write more. It was so coarse, so unfeminine.
‘And what more am I to write him?’ she said to herself.
Again a flush of shame spread over her face; she recalled
his composure, and a feeling of anger against him impelled
her to tear the sheet with the phrase she had written into
Anna Karenina
636 of 1759
tiny bits. ‘No need of anything,’ she said to herself, and
closing her blotting-case she went upstairs, told the
governess and the servants that she was going that day to
Moscow, and at once set to work to pack up her things.
Anna Karenina
637 of 1759
Chapter 16
All the rooms of the summer villa were full of porters,
gardeners, and footmen going to and fro carrying out
things. Cupboards and chests were open; twice they had
sent to the shop for cord; pieces of newspaper were tossing
about on the floor. Two trunks, some bags and strappedup rugs, had been carried down into the hall. The carriage
and two hired cabs were waiting at the steps. Anna,
forgetting her inward agitation in the work of packing,
was standing at a table in her boudoir, packing her
traveling bag, when Annushka called her attention to the
rattle of some carriage driving up. Anna looked out of the
window and saw Alexey Alexandrovitch’s courier on the
steps, ringing at the front door bell.
‘Run and find out what it is,’ she said, and with a calm
sense of being prepared for anything, she sat down in a
low chair, folding her hands on her knees. A footman
brought in a thick packet directed in Alexey
Alexandrovitch’s hand.
‘The courier had orders to wait for an answer,’ he said.
‘Very well,’ she said, and as soon as he had left the
room she tore open the letter with trembling fingers. A
Anna Karenina
638 of 1759
roll of unfolded notes done up in a wrapper fell out of it.
She disengaged the letter and began reading it at the end.
‘Preparations shall be made for your arrival here...I attach
particular significance to compliance...’ she read. She ran
on, then back, read it all through, and once more read the
letter all through again from the beginning. When she had
finished, she felt that she was cold all over, and that a
fearful calamity, such as she had not expected, had burst
upon her.
In the morning she had regretted that she had spoken
to her husband, and wished for nothing so much as that
those words could be unspoken. And here this letter
regarded them as unspoken, and gave her what she had
wanted. But now this letter seemed to her more awful
than anything she had been able to conceive.
‘He’s right!’ she said; ‘of course, he’s always right; he’s a
Christian, he’s generous! Yes, vile, base creature! And no
one understands it except me, and no one ever will; and I
can’t explain it. They say he’s so religious, so highprincipled, so upright, so clever; but they don’t see what
I’ve seen. They don’t know how he has crushed my life
for eight years, crushed everything that was living in me—
he has not once even thought that I’m a live woman who
must have love. They don’t know how at every step he’s
Anna Karenina
639 of 1759
humiliated me, and been just as pleased with himself.
Haven’t I striven, striven with all my strength, to find
something to give meaning to my life? Haven’t I struggled
to love him, to love my son when I could not love my
husband? But the time came when I knew that I couldn’t
cheat myself any longer, that I was alive, that I was not to
blame, that God has made me so that I must love and live.
And now what does he do? If he’d killed me, if he’d killed
him, I could have borne anything, I could have forgiven
anything; but, no, he.... How was it I didn’t guess what he
would do? He’s doing just what’s characteristic of his
mean character. He’ll keep himself in the right, while me,
in my ruin, he’ll drive still lower to worse ruin yet..’
She recalled the words from the letter. ‘You can
conjecture what awaits you and your son....’ ‘That’s a
threat to take away my child, and most likely by their
stupid law he can. But I know very well why he says it.
He doesn’t believe even in my love for my child, or he
despises it (just as he always used to ridicule it). He
despises that feeling in me, but he knows that I won’t
abandon my child, that I can’t abandon my child, that
there could be no life for me without my child, even with
him whom I love; but that if I abandoned my child and
ran away from him, I should be acting like the most
Anna Karenina
640 of 1759
infamous, basest of women. He knows that, and knows
that I am incapable of doing that.’
She recalled another sentence in the letter. ‘Our life
must go on as it has done in the past....’ ‘That life was
miserable enough in the old days; it has been awful of late.
What will it be now? And he knows all that; he knows
that I can’t repent that I breathe, that I love; he knows
that it can lead to nothing but lying and deceit; but he
wants to go on torturing me. I know him; I know that
he’s at home and is happy in deceit, like a fish swimming
in the water. No, I won’t give him that happiness. I’ll
break through the spiderweb of lies in which he wants to
catch me, come what may. Anything’s better than lying
and deceit.
‘But how? My God! my God! Was ever a woman so
miserable as I am?..’
‘No; I will break through it, I will break through it!’
she cried, jumping up and keeping back her tears. And she
went to the writing table to write him another letter. But
at the bottom of her heart she felt that she was not strong
enough to break through anything, that she was not strong
enough to get out of her old position, however false and
dishonorable it might be.
Anna Karenina
641 of 1759
She sat down at the writing table, but instead of writing
she clasped her hands on the table, and, laying her head on
them, burst into tears, with sobs and heaving breast like a
child crying. She was weeping that her dream of her
position being made clear and definite had been
annihilated forever. She knew beforehand that everything
would go on in the old way, and far worse, indeed, than
in the old way. She felt that the position in the world that
she enjoyed, and that had seemed to her of so little
consequence in the morning, that this position was
precious to her, that she would not have the strength to
exchange it for the shameful position of a woman who has
abandoned husband and child to join her lover; that
however much she might struggle, she could not be
stronger than herself. She would never know freedom in
love, but would remain forever a guilty wife, with the
menace of detection hanging over her at every instant;
deceiving her husband for the sake of a shameful
connection with a man living apart and away from her,
whose life she could never share. She knew that this was
how it would be, and at the same time it was so awful that
she could not even conceive what it would end in. And
she cried without restraint, as children cry when they are
punished.
Anna Karenina
642 of 1759
The sound of the footman’s steps forced her to rouse
herself, and hiding her face from him, she pretended to be
writing.
‘The courier asks if there’s an answer,’ the footman
announced.
‘An answer? Yes,’ said Anna. ‘Let him wait. I’ll ring.’
‘What can I write?’ she thought. ‘What can I decide
upon alone? What do I know? What do I want? What is
there I care for?’ Again she felt that her soul was beginning
to be split in two. She was terrified again at this feeling,
and clutched at the first pretext for doing something
which might divert her thoughts from herself. ‘I ought to
see Alexey’ (so she called Vronsky in her thoughts); ‘no
one but he can tell me what I ought to do. I’ll go to
Betsy’s, perhaps I shall see him there,’ she said to herself,
completely forgetting that when she had told him the day
before that she was not going to Princess Tverskaya’s, he
had said that in that case he should not go either. She
went up to the table, wrote to her husband, ‘I have
received your letter. —A.’; and, ringing the bell, gave it to
the footman.
‘We are not going,’ she said to Annushka, as she came
in.
‘Not going at all?’
Anna Karenina
643 of 1759
‘No; don’t unpack till tomorrow, and let the carriage
wait. I’m going to the princess’s.’
‘Which dress am I to get ready?’
Anna Karenina
644 of 1759
Chapter 17
The croquet party to which the Princess Tverskaya had
invited Anna was to consist of two ladies and their adorers.
These two ladies were the chief representatives of a select
new Petersburg circle, nicknamed, in imitation of some
imitation, les sept merveilles du monde. These ladies
belonged to a circle which, though of the highest society,
was utterly hostile to that in which Anna moved.
Moreover, Stremov, one of the most influential people in
Petersburg, and the elderly admirer of Liza Merkalova, was
Alexey Alexandrovitch’s enemy in the political world.
From all these considerations Anna had not meant to go,
and the hints in Princess Tverskaya’s note referred to her
refusal. But now Anna was eager to go, in the hope of
seeing Vronsky.
Anna arrived at Princess Tverskaya’s earlier than the
other guests.
At the same moment as she entered, Vronsky’s
footman, with side- whiskers combed out like a
Kammerjunker, went in too. He stopped at the door, and,
taking off his cap, let her pass. Anna recognized him, and
only then recalled that Vronsky had told her the day
Anna Karenina
645 of 1759
before that he would not come. Most likely he was
sending a note to say so.
As she took off her outer garment in the hall, she heard
the footman, pronouncing his ‘r’s’ even like a
Kammerjunker, say, ‘From the count for the princess,’ and
hand the note.
She longed to question him as to where his master was.
She longed to turn back and send him a letter to come and
see her, or to go herself to see him. But neither the first
nor the second nor the third course was possible. Already
she heard bells ringing to announce her arrival ahead of
her, and Princess Tverskaya’s footman was standing at the
open door waiting for her to go forward into the inner
rooms.
‘The princess is in the garden; they will inform her
immediately. Would you be pleased to walk into the
garden?’ announced another footman in another room.
The position of uncertainty, of indecision, was still the
same as at home—worse, in fact, since it was impossible to
take any step, impossible to see Vronsky, and she had to
remain here among outsiders, in company so uncongenial
to her present mood. But she was wearing a dress that she
knew suited her. She was not alone; all around was that
luxurious setting of idleness that she was used to, and she
Anna Karenina
646 of 1759
felt less wretched than at home. She was not forced to
think what she was to do. Everything would be done of
itself. On meeting Betsy coming towards her in a white
gown that struck her by its elegance, Anna smiled at her
just as she always did. Princess Tverskaya was walking
with Tushkevitch and a young lady, a relation, who, to
the great joy of her parents in the provinces, was spending
the summer with the fashionable princess.
There was probably something unusual about Anna, for
Betsy noticed it at once.
‘I slept badly,’ answered Anna, looking intently at the
footman who came to meet them, and, as she supposed,
brought Vronsky’s note.
‘How glad I am you’ve come!’ said Betsy. ‘I’m tired,
and was just longing to have some tea before they come.
You might go’— she turned to Tushkevitch—‘with
Masha, and try the croquet ground over there where
they’ve been cutting it. We shall have time to talk a little
over tea; we’ll have a cozy chat, eh?’ she said in English to
Anna, with a smile, pressing the hand with which she held
a parasol.
‘Yes, especially as I can’t stay very long with you. I’m
forced to go on to old Madame Vrede. I’ve been
promising to go for a century,’ said Anna, to whom lying,
Anna Karenina
647 of 1759
alien as it was to her nature, had become not merely
simple and natural in society, but a positive source of
satisfaction. Why she said this, which she had not thought
of a second before, she could not have explained. She had
said it simply from the reflection that as Vronsky would
not be here, she had better secure her own freedom, and
try to see him somehow. But why she had spoken of old
Madame Vrede, whom she had to go and see, as she had
to see many other people, she could not have explained;
and yet, as it afterwards turned out, had she contrived the
most cunning devices to meet Vronsky, she could have
thought of nothing better.
‘No. I’m not going to let you go for anything,’
answered Betsy, looking intently into Anna’s face. ‘Really,
if I were not fond of you, I should feel offended. One
would think you were afraid my society would
compromise you. Tea in the little dining room, please,’
she said, half closing her eyes, as she always did when
addressing the footman.
Taking the note from him, she read it.
‘Alexey’s playing us false,’ she said in French; ‘he writes
that he can’t come,’ she added in a tone as simple and
natural as though it could never enter her head that
Vronsky could mean anything more to Anna than a game
Anna Karenina
648 of 1759
of croquet. Anna knew that Betsy knew everything, but,
hearing how she spoke of Vronsky before her, she almost
felt persuaded for a minute that she knew nothing.
‘Ah!’ said Anna indifferently, as though not greatly
interested in the matter, and she went on smiling: ‘How
can you or your friends compromise anyone?’
This playing with words, this hiding of a secret, had a
great fascination for Anna, as, indeed, it has for all women.
And it was not the necessity of concealment, not the aim
with which the concealment was contrived, but the
process of concealment itself which attracted her.
‘I can’t be more Catholic than the Pope,’ she said.
‘Stremov and Liza Merkalova, why, they’re the cream of
the cream of society. Besides, they’re received
everywhere, and I’—she laid special stress on the I—‘have
never been strict and intolerant. It’s simply that I haven’t
the time.’
‘No; you don’t care, perhaps, to meet Stremov? Let
him and Alexey Alexandrovitch tilt at each other in the
committee— that’s no affair of ours. But in the world, he’s
the most amiable man I know, and a devoted croquet
player. You shall see. And, in spite of his absurd position
as Liza’s lovesick swain at his age, you ought to see how
he carries off the absurd position. He’s very nice. Sappho
Anna Karenina
649 of 1759
Shtoltz you don’t know? Oh, that’s a new type, quite
new.’
Betsy said all this, and, at the same time, from her
good-humored, shrewd glance, Anna felt that she partly
guessed her plight, and was hatching something for her
benefit. They were in the little boudoir.
‘I must write to Alexey though,’ and Betsy sat down to
the table, scribbled a few lines, and put the note in an
envelope.
‘I’m telling him to come to dinner. I’ve one lady extra
to dinner with me, and no man to take her in. Look what
I’ve said, will that persuade him? Excuse me, I must leave
you for a minute. Would you seal it up, please, and send it
off?’ she said from the door; ‘I have to give some
directions.’
Without a moment’s thought, Anna sat down to the
table with Betsy’s letter, and, without reading it, wrote
below: ‘It’s essential for me to see you. Come to the
Vrede garden. I shall be there at six o’clock.’ She sealed it
up, and, Betsy coming back, in her presence handed the
note to be taken.
At tea, which was brought them on a little tea-table in
the cool little drawing room, the cozy chat promised by
Princess Tverskaya before the arrival of her visitors really
Anna Karenina
650 of 1759
did come off between the two women. They criticized
the people they were expecting, and the conversation fell
upon Liza Merkalova.
‘She’s very sweet, and I always liked her,’ said Anna.
‘You ought to like her. She raves about you. Yesterday
she came up to me after the races and was in despair at not
finding you. She says you’re a real heroine of romance,
and that if she were a man she would do all sorts of mad
things for your sake. Stremov says she does that as it is.’
‘But do tell me, please, I never could make it out,’ said
Anna, after being silent for some time, speaking in a tone
that showed she was not asking an idle question, but that
what she was asking was of more importance to her than it
should have been; ‘do tell me, please, what are her
relations with Prince Kaluzhsky, Mishka, as he’s called?
I’ve met them so little. What does it mean?’
Betsy smiled with her eyes, and looked intently at
Anna.
‘It’s a new manner,’ she said. ‘They’ve all adopted that
manner. They’ve flung their caps over the windmills. But
there are ways and ways of flinging them.’
‘Yes, but what are her relations precisely with
Kaluzhsky?’
Anna Karenina
651 of 1759
Betsy broke into unexpectedly mirthful and
irrepressible laughter, a thing which rarely happened with
her.
‘You’re encroaching on Princess Myakaya’s special
domain now. That’s the question of an enfant terrible,’
and Betsy obviously tried to restrain herself, but could not,
and went off into peals of that infectious laughter that
people laugh who do not laugh often. ‘You’d better ask
them,’ she brought out, between tears of laughter.
‘No; you laugh,’ said Anna, laughing too in spite of
herself, ‘but I never could understand it. I can’t understand
the husband’s role in it.’
‘The husband? Liza Merkalova’s husband carries her
shawl, and is always ready to be of use. But anything more
than that in reality, no one cares to inquire. You know in
decent society one doesn’t talk or think even of certain
details of the toilet. That’s how it is with this.’
‘Will you be at Madame Rolandak’s fete?’ asked Anna,
to change the conversation.
‘I don’t think so,’ answered Betsy, and, without
looking at her friend, she began filling the little transparent
cups with fragrant tea. Putting a cup before Anna, she
took out a cigarette, and, fitting it into a silver holder, she
lighted it.
Anna Karenina
652 of 1759
‘It’s like this, you see: I’m in a fortunate position,’ she
began, quite serious now, as she took up her cup. ‘I
understand you, and I understand Liza. Liza now is one of
those naive natures that, like children, don’t know what’s
good and what’s bad. Anyway, she didn’t comprehend it
when she was very young. And now she’s aware that the
lack of comprehension suits her. Now, perhaps, she
doesn’t know on purpose,’ said Betsy, with a subtle smile.
‘But, anyway, it suits her. The very same thing, don’t you
see, may be looked at tragically, and turned into a misery,
or it may be looked at simply and even humorously.
Possibly you are inclined to look at things too tragically.’
‘How I should like to know other people just as I
know myself!’ said Anna, seriously and dreamily. ‘Am I
worse than other people, or better? I think I’m worse.’
‘Enfant terrible, enfant terrible!’ repeated Betsy. ‘But
here they are.’
Anna Karenina
653 of 1759
Chapter 18
They heard the sound of steps and a man’s voice, then
a woman’s voice and laughter, and immediately thereafter
there walked in the expected guests: Sappho Shtoltz, and a
young man beaming with excess of health, the so-called
Vaska. It was evident that ample supplies of beefsteak,
truffles, and Burgundy never failed to reach him at the
fitting hour. Vaska bowed to the two ladies, and glanced at
them, but only for one second. He walked after Sappho
into the drawing-room, and followed her about as though
he were chained to her, keeping his sparkling eyes fixed
on her as though he wanted to eat her. Sappho Shtoltz was
a blonde beauty with black eyes. She walked with smart
little steps in high-heeled shoes, and shook hands with the
ladies vigorously like a man.
Anna had never met this new star of fashion, and was
struck by her beauty, the exaggerated extreme to which
her dress was carried, and the boldness of her manners. On
her head there was such a superstructure of soft, golden
hair—her own and false mixed—that her head was equal
in size to the elegantly rounded bust, of which so much
was exposed in front. The impulsive abruptness of her
Anna Karenina
654 of 1759
movements was such that at every step the lines of her
knees and the upper part of her legs were distinctly
marked under her dress, and the question involuntarily
rose to the mind where in the undulating, piled-up
mountain of material at the back the real body of the
woman, so small and slender, so naked in front, and so
hidden behind and below, really came to an end.
Betsy made haste to introduce her to Anna.
‘Only fancy, we all but ran over two soldiers,’ she
began telling them at once, using her eyes, smiling and
twitching away her tail, which she flung back at one
stroke all on one side. ‘I drove here with Vaska.... Ah, to
be sure, you don’t know each other.’ And mentioning his
surname she introduced the young man, and reddening a
little, broke into a ringing laugh at her mistake—that is at
her having called him Vaska to a stranger. Vaska bowed
once more to Anna, but he said nothing to her. He
addressed Sappho: ‘You’ve lost your bet. We got here
first. Pay up,’ said he, smiling.
Sappho laughed still more festively.
‘Not just now,’ said she.
‘Oh, all right, I’ll have it later.’
‘Very well, very well. Oh, yes.’ She turned suddenly to
Princess Betsy: ‘I am a nice person...I positively forgot it...
Anna Karenina
655 of 1759
I’ve brought you a visitor. And here he comes.’ The
unexpected young visitor, whom Sappho had invited, and
whom she had forgotten, was, however, a personage of
such consequence that, in spite of his youth, both the
ladies rose on his entrance.
He was a new admirer of Sappho’s. He now dogged
her footsteps, like Vaska.
Soon after Prince Kaluzhsky arrived, and Liza
Merkalova with Stremov. Liza Merkalova was a thin
brunette, with an Oriental, languid type of face, and—as
everyone used to say—exquisite enigmatic eyes. The tone
of her dark dress (Anna immediately observed and
appreciated the fact) was in perfect harmony with her style
of beauty. Liza was as soft and enervated as Sappho was
smart and abrupt.
But to Anna’s taste Liza was far more attractive. Betsy
had said to Anna that she had adopted the pose of an
innocent child, but when Anna saw her, she felt that this
was not the truth. She really was both innocent and
corrupt, but a sweet and passive woman. It is true that her
tone was the same as Sappho’s; that like Sappho, she had
two men, one young and one old, tacked onto her, and
devouring her with their eyes. But there was something in
her higher than what surrounded her. There was in her
Anna Karenina
656 of 1759
the glow of the real diamond among glass imitations. This
glow shone out in her exquisite, truly enigmatic eyes. The
weary, and at the same time passionate, glance of those
eyes, encircled by dark rings, impressed one by its perfect
sincerity. Everyone looking into those eyes fancied he
knew her wholly, and knowing her, could not but love
her. At the sight of Anna, her whole face lighted up at
once with a smile of delight.
‘Ah, how glad I am to see you!’ she said, going up to
her. ‘Yesterday at the races all I wanted was to get to you,
but you’d gone away. I did so want to see you, yesterday
especially.
Wasn’t it awful?’ she said, looking at Anna with eyes
that seemed to lay bare all her soul.
‘Yes; I had no idea it would be so thrilling,’ said Anna,
blushing.
The company got up at this moment to go into the
garden.
‘I’m not going,’ said Liza, smiling and settling herself
close to Anna. ‘You won’t go either, will you? Who
wants to play croquet?’
‘Oh, I like it,’ said Anna.
Anna Karenina
657 of 1759
‘There, how do you manage never to be bored by
things? It’s delightful to look at you. You’re alive, but I’m
bored.’
‘How can you be bored? Why, you live in the liveliest
set in Petersburg,’ said Anna.
‘Possibly the people who are not of our set are even
more bored; but we—I certainly—are not happy, but
awfully, awfully bored.’
Sappho smoking a cigarette went off into the garden
with the two young men. Betsy and Stremov remained at
the tea-table.
‘What, bored!’ said Betsy. ‘Sappho says they did enjoy
themselves tremendously at your house last night.’
‘Ah, how dreary it all was!’ said Liza Merkalova. ‘We
all drove back to my place after the races. And always the
same people, always the same. Always the same thing. We
lounged about on sofas all the evening. What is there to
enjoy in that? No; do tell me how you manage never to
be bored?’ she said, addressing Anna again. ‘One has but
to look at you and one sees, here’s a woman who may be
happy or unhappy, but isn’t bored. Tell me how you do
it?’
‘I do nothing,’ answered Anna, blushing at these
searching questions.
Anna Karenina
658 of 1759
‘That’s the best way,’ Stremov put it. Stremov was a
man of fifty, partly gray, but still vigorous-looking, very
ugly, but with a characteristic and intelligent face. Liza
Merkalova was his wife’s niece, and he spent all his leisure
hours with her. On meeting Anna Karenina, as he was
Alexey Alexandrovitch’s enemy in the government, he
tried, like a shrewd man and a man of the world, to be
particularly cordial with her, the wife of his enemy.
‘‘Nothing,’’ he put in with a subtle smile, ‘that’s the
very best way. I told you long ago,’ he said, turning to
Liza Merkalova, ‘that if you don’t want to be bored, you
mustn’t think you’re going to be bored. It’s just as you
mustn’t be afraid of not being able to fall asleep, if you’re
afraid of sleeplessness. That’s just what Anna Arkadyevna
has just said.’
‘I should be very glad if I had said it, for it’s not only
clever but true,’ said Anna, smiling.
‘No, do tell me why it is one can’t go to sleep, and one
can’t help being bored?’
‘To sleep well one ought to work, and to enjoy oneself
one ought to work too.’
‘What am I to work for when my work is no use to
anybody? And I can’t and won’t knowingly make a
pretense about it.’
Anna Karenina
659 of 1759
‘You’re incorrigible,’ said Stremov, not looking at her,
and he spoke again to Anna. As he rarely met Anna, he
could say nothing but commonplaces to her, but he said
those commonplaces as to when she was returning to
Petersburg, and how fond Countess Lidia Ivanovna was of
her, with an expression which suggested that he longed
with his whole soul to please her and show his regard for
her and even more than that.
Tushkevitch came in, announcing that the party were
awaiting the other players to begin croquet.
‘No, don’t go away, please don’t,’ pleaded Liza
Merkalova, hearing that Anna was going. Stremov joined
in her entreaties.
‘It’s too violent a transition,’ he said, ‘to go from such
company to old Madame Vrede. And besides, you will
only give her a chance for talking scandal, while here you
arouse none but such different feelings of the highest and
most opposite kind,’ he said to her.
Anna pondered for an instant in uncertainty. This
shrewd man’s flattering words, the naive, childlike
affection shown her by Liza Merkalova, and all the social
atmosphere she was used to,— it was all so easy, and what
was in store for her was so difficult, that she was for a
minute in uncertainty whether to remain, whether to put
Anna Karenina
660 of 1759
off a little longer the painful moment of explanation. But
remembering what was in store for her alone at home, if
she did not come to some decision, remembering that
gesture—terrible even in memory—when she had
clutched her hair in both hands—she said good-bye and
went away.
Anna Karenina
661 of 1759
Chapter 19
In spite of Vronsky’s apparently frivolous life in society,
he was a man who hated irregularity. In early youth in the
Corps of Pages, he had experienced the humiliation of a
refusal, when he had tried, being in difficulties, to borrow
money, and since then he had never once put himself in
the same position again.
In order to keep his affairs in some sort of order, he
used about five times a year (more or less frequently,
according to circumstances) to shut himself up alone and
put all his affairs into definite shape. This he used to call
his day of reckoning or faire la lessive.
On waking up the day after the races, Vronsky put on a
white linen coat, and without shaving or taking his bath,
he distributed about the table moneys, bills, and letters,
and set to work. Petritsky, who knew he was ill-tempered
on such occasions, on waking up and seeing his comrade
at the writing-table, quietly dressed and went out without
getting in his way.
Every man who knows to the minutest details all the
complexity of the conditions surrounding him, cannot
help imagining that the complexity of these conditions,
Anna Karenina
662 of 1759
and the difficulty of making them clear, is something
exceptional and personal, peculiar to himself, and never
supposes that others are surrounded by just as complicated
an array of personal affairs as he is. So indeed it seemed to
Vronsky. And not with out inward pride, and not without
reason, he thought that any other man would long ago
have been in difficulties, would have been forced to some
dishonorable course, if he had found himself in such a
difficult position. But Vronsky felt that now especially it
was essential for him to clear up and define his position if
he were to avoid getting into difficulties.
What Vronsky attacked first as being the easiest was his
pecuniary position. Writing out on note paper in his
minute hand all that he owed, he added up the amount
and found that his debts amounted to seventeen thousand
and some odd hundreds, which he left out for the sake of
clearness. Reckoning up his money and his bank book, he
found that he had left one thousand eight hundred
roubles, and nothing coming in before the New Year.
Reckoning over again his list of debts, Vronsky copied it,
dividing it into three classes. In the first class he put the
debts which he would have to pay at once, or for which
he must in any case have the money ready so that on
demand for payment there could not be a moment’s delay
Anna Karenina
663 of 1759
in paying. Such debts amounted to about four thousand:
one thousand five hundred for a horse, and two thousand
five hundred as surety for a young comrade, Venovsky,
who had lost that sum to a cardsharper in Vronsky’s
presence. Vronsky had wanted to pay the money at the
time (he had that amount then), but Venovsky and
Yashvin had insisted that they would pay and not
Vronsky, who had not played. That was so far well, but
Vronsky knew that in this dirty business, though his only
share in it was undertaking by word of mouth to be surety
for Venovsky, it was absolutely necessary for him to have
the two thousand five hundred roubles so as to be able to
fling it at the swindler, and have no more words with him.
And so for this first and most important division he must
have four thousand roubles. The second class—eight
thousand roubles—consisted of less important debts. These
were principally accounts owing in connection with his
race horses, to the purveyor of oats and hay, the English
saddler, and so on. He would have to pay some two
thousand roubles on these debts too, in order to be quite
free from anxiety. The last class of debts—to shops, to
hotels, to his tailor—were such as need not be considered.
So that he needed at least six thousand roubles for current
expenses, and he only had one thousand eight hundred.
Anna Karenina
664 of 1759
For a man with one hundred thousand roubles of revenue,
which was what everyone fixed as Vronsky’s income, such
debts, one would suppose, could hardly be embarrassing;
but the fact was that he was far from having one hundred
thousand. His father’s immense property, which alone
yielded a yearly income of two hundred thousand, was left
undivided between the brothers. At the time when the
elder brother, with a mass of debts, married Princess Varya
Tchirkova, the daughter of a Decembrist without any
fortune whatever, Alexey had given up to his elder
brother almost the whole income from his father’s estate,
reserving for himself only twenty-five thousand a year
from it. Alexey had said at the time to his brother that that
sum would be sufficient for him until he married, which
he probably never would do. And his brother, who was in
command of one of the most expensive regiments, and
was only just married, could not decline the gift. His
mother, who had her own separate property, had allowed
Alexey every year twenty thousand in addition to the
twenty-five thousand he had reserved, and Alexey had
spent it all. Of late his mother, incensed with him on
account of his love affair and his leaving Moscow, had
given up sending him the money. And in consequence of
this, Vronsky, who had been in the habit of living on the
Anna Karenina
665 of 1759
scale of forty-five thousand a year, having only received
twenty thousand that year, found himself now in
difficulties. To get out of these difficulties, he could not
apply to his mother for money. Her last letter, which he
had received the day before, had particularly exasperated
him by the hints in it that she was quite ready to help him
to succeed in the world and in the army, but not to lead a
life which was a scandal to all good society. His mother’s
attempt to buy him stung him to the quick and made him
feel colder than ever to her. But he could not draw back
from the generous word when it was once uttered, even
though he felt now, vaguely foreseeing certain
eventualities in his intrigue with Madame Karenina, that
this generous word had been spoken thoughtlessly, and
that even though he were not married he might need all
the hundred thousand of income. But it was impossible to
draw back. He had only to recall his brother’s wife, to
remember how that sweet, delightful Varya sought, at
every convenient opportunity, to remind him that she
remembered his generosity and appreciated it, to grasp the
impossibility of taking back his gift. It was as impossible as
beating a woman, stealing, or lying. One thing only could
and ought to be done, and Vronsky determined upon it
without an instant’s hesitation: to borrow money from a
Anna Karenina
666 of 1759
money-lender, ten thousand roubles, a proceeding which
presented no difficulty, to cut down his expenses
generally, and to sell his race horses. Resolving on this, he
promptly wrote a note to Rolandak, who had more than
once sent to him with offers to buy horses from him.
Then he sent for the Englishman and the money-lender,
and divided what money he had according to the accounts
he intended to pay. Having finished this business, he
wrote a cold and cutting answer to his mother. Then he
took out of his notebook three notes of Anna’s, read them
again, burned them, and remembering their conversation
on the previous day, he sank into meditation.
Anna Karenina
667 of 1759
Chapter 20
Vronsky’s life was particularly happy in that he had a
code of principles, which defined with unfailing certitude
what he ought and what he ought not to do. This code of
principles covered only a very small circle of
contingencies, but then the principles were never
doubtful, and Vronsky, as he never went outside that
circle, had never had a moment’s hesitation about doing
what he ought to do. These principles laid down as
invariable rules: that one must pay a cardsharper, but need
not pay a tailor; that one must never tell a lie to a man,
but one may to a woman; that one must never cheat
anyone, but one may a husband; that one must never
pardon an insult, but one may give one and so on. These
principles were possibly not reasonable and not good, but
they were of unfailing certainty, and so long as he adhered
to them, Vronsky felt that his heart was at peace and he
could hold his head up. Only quite lately in regard to his
relations with Anna, Vronsky had begun to feel that his
code of principles did not fully cover all possible
contingencies, and to foresee in the future difficulties and
perplexities for which he could find no guiding clue.
Anna Karenina
668 of 1759
His present relation to Anna and to her husband was to
his mind clear and simple. It was clearly and precisely
defined in the code of principles by which he was guided.
she was an honorable woman who had bestowed her
love upon him, and he loved her, and therefore she was in
his eyes a woman who had a right to the same, or even
more, respect than a lawful wife. He would have had his
hand chopped off before he would have allowed himself
by a word, by a hint, to humiliate her, or even to fall short
of the fullest respect a woman could look for.
His attitude to society, too, was clear. Everyone might
know, might suspect it, but no one might dare to speak of
it. If any did so, he was ready to force all who might speak
to be silent and to respect the nonexistent honor of the
woman he loved.
His attitude to the husband was the clearest of all. From
the moment that Anna loved Vronsky, he had regarded his
own right over her as the one thing unassailable. Her
husband was simply a superfluous and tiresome person. No
doubt he was in a pitiable position, but how could that be
helped? The one thing the husband had a right to was to
demand satisfaction with a weapon in his hand, and
Vronsky was prepared for this at any minute.
Anna Karenina
669 of 1759
But of late new inner relations had arisen between him
and her, which frightened Vronsky by their indefiniteness.
Only the day before she had told him that she was with
child. And he felt that this fact and what she expected of
him called for something not fully defined in that code of
principles by which he had hitherto steered his course in
life. And he had been indeed caught unawares, and at the
first moment when she spoke to him of her position, his
heart had prompted him to beg her to leave her husband.
He had said that, but now thinking things over he saw
clearly that it would be better to manage to avoid that; and
at the same time, as he told himself so, he was afraid
whether it was not wrong.
‘If I told her to leave her husband, that must mean
uniting her life with mine; am I prepared for that? How
can I take her away now, when I have no money?
Supposing I could arrange.... But how can I take her away
while I’m in the service? If I say that I ought to be
prepared to do it, that is, I ought to have the money and
to retire from the army.’
And he grew thoughtful. The question whether to
retire from the service or not brought him to the other
and perhaps the chief though hidden interest of his life, of
which none knew but he.
Anna Karenina
670 of 1759
Ambition was the old dream of his youth and
childhood, a dream which he did not confess even to
himself, though it was so strong that now this passion was
even doing battle with his love. His first steps in the world
and in the service had been successful, but two years
before he had made a great mistake. Anxious to show his
independence and to advance, he had refused a post that
had been offered him, hoping that this refusal would
heighten his value; but it turned out that he had been too
bold, and he was passed over. And having, whether he
liked or not, taken up for himself the position of an
independent man, he carried it off with great tact and
good sense, behaving as though he bore no grudge against
anyone, did not regard himself as injured in any way, and
cared for nothing but to be left alone since he was
enjoying himself. In reality he had ceased to enjoy himself
as long ago as the year before, when he went away to
Moscow. He felt that this independent attitude of a man
who might have done anything, but cared to do nothing
was already beginning to pall, that many people were
beginning to fancy that he was not really capable of
anything but being a straightforward, good-natured fellow.
His connection with Madame Karenina, by creating so
much sensation and attracting general attention, had given
Anna Karenina
671 of 1759
him a fresh distinction which soothed his gnawing worm
of ambition for a while, but a week before that worm had
been roused up again with fresh force. The friend of his
childhood, a man of the same set, of the same coterie, his
comrade in the Corps of Pages, Serpuhovskoy, who had
left school with him and had been his rival in class, in
gymnastics, in their scrapes and their dreams of glory, had
come back a few days before from Central Asia, where he
had gained two steps up in rank, and an order rarely
bestowed upon generals so young.
As soon as he arrived in Petersburg, people began to
talk about him as a newly risen star of the first magnitude.
A schoolfellow of Vronsky’s and of the same age, he was a
general and was expecting a command, which might have
influence on the course of political events; while Vronsky,
independent and brilliant and beloved by a charming
woman though he was, was simply a cavalry captain who
was readily allowed to be as independent as ever he liked.
‘Of course I don’t envy Serpuhovskoy and never could
envy him; but his advancement shows me that one has
only to watch one’s opportunity, and the career of a man
like me may be very rapidly made. Three years ago he was
in just the same position as I am. If I retire, I burn my
ships. If I remain in the army, I lose nothing. She said
Anna Karenina
672 of 1759
herself she did not wish to change her position. And with
her love I cannot feel envious of Serpuhovskoy.’ And
slowly twirling his mustaches, he got up from the table
and walked about the room. His eyes shone particularly
brightly, and he felt in that confident, calm, and happy
frame of mind which always came after he had thoroughly
faced his position. Everything was straight and clear, just as
after former days of reckoning. He shaved, took a cold
bath, dressed and went out.
Anna Karenina
673 of 1759
Chapter 21
‘We’ve come to fetch you. Your lessive lasted a good
time today,’ said Petritsky. ‘Well, is it over?’
‘It is over,’ answered Vronsky, smiling with his eyes
only, and twirling the tips of his mustaches as
circumspectly as though after the perfect order into which
his affairs had been brought any over-bold or rapid
movement might disturb it.
‘You’re always just as if you’d come out of a bath after
it,’ said Petritsky. ‘I’ve come from Gritsky’s’ (that was
what they called the colonel); ‘they’re expecting you.’
Vronsky, without answering, looked at his comrade,
thinking of something else.
‘Yes; is that music at his place?’ he said, listening to the
familiar sounds of polkas and waltzes floating across to
him. ‘What’s the fete?’
‘Serpuhovskoy’s come.’
‘Aha!’ said Vronsky, ‘why, I didn’t know.’
The smile in his eyes gleamed more brightly than ever.
Having once made up his mind that he was happy in
his love, that he sacrificed his ambition to it—having
anyway taken up this position, Vronsky was incapable of
Anna Karenina
674 of 1759
feeling either envious of Serpuhovskoy or hurt with him
for not coming first to him when he came to the
regiment. Serpuhovskoy was a good friend, and he was
delighted he had come.
‘Ah, I’m very glad!’
The colonel, Demin, had taken a large country house.
The whole party were in the wide lower balcony. In the
courtyard the first objects that met Vronsky’s eyes were a
band of singers in white linen coats, standing near a barrel
of vodka, and the robust, good-humored figure of the
colonel surrounded by officers. He had gone out as far as
the first step of the balcony and was loudly shouting across
the band that played Offenbach’s quadrille, waving his
arms and giving some orders to a few soldiers standing on
one side. A group of soldiers, a quartermaster, and several
subalterns came up to the balcony with Vronsky. The
colonel returned to the table, went out again onto the
steps with a tumbler in his hand, and proposed the toast,
‘To the health of our former comrade, the gallant general,
Prince Serpuhovskoy. Hurrah!’
The colonel was followed by Serpuhovskoy, who came
out onto the steps smiling, with a glass in his hand.
‘You always get younger, Bondarenko,’ he said to the
rosy-checked, smart-looking quartermaster standing just
Anna Karenina
675 of 1759
before him, still youngish looking though doing his
second term of service.
It was three years since Vronsky had seen
Serpuhovskoy. He looked more robust, had let his
whiskers grow, but was still the same graceful creature,
whose face and figure were even more striking from their
softness and nobility than their beauty. The only change
Vronsky detected in him was that subdued, continual
radiance of beaming content which settles on the faces of
men who are successful and are sure of the recognition of
their success by everyone. Vronsky knew that radiant air,
and immediately observed it in Serpuhovskoy.
As Serpuhovskoy came down the steps he saw
Vronsky. A smile of pleasure lighted up his face. He tossed
his head upwards and waved the glass in his hand, greeting
Vronsky, and showing him by the gesture that he could
not come to him before the quartermaster, who stood
craning forward his lips ready to be kissed.
‘Here he is!’ shouted the colonel. ‘Yashvin told me you
were in one of your gloomy tempers.’
Serpuhovskoy kissed the moist, fresh lips of the gallantlooking quartermaster, and wiping his mouth with his
handkerchief, went up to Vronsky.
Anna Karenina
676 of 1759
‘How glad I am!’ he said, squeezing his hand and
drawing him on one side.
‘You look after him,’ the colonel shouted to Yashvin,
pointing to Vronsky; and he went down below to the
soldiers.
‘Why weren’t you at the races yesterday? I expected to
see you there,’ said Vronsky, scrutinizing Serpuhovskoy.
‘I did go, but late. I beg your pardon,’ he added, and he
turned to the adjutant: ‘Please have this divided from me,
each man as much as it runs to.’ And he hurriedly took
notes for three hundred roubles from his pocketbook,
blushing a little.
‘Vronsky! Have anything to eat or drink?’ asked
Yashvin. ‘Hi, something for the count to eat! Ah, here it
is: have a glass!’
The fete at the colonel’s lasted a long while. There was
a great deal of drinking. They tossed Serpuhovskoy in the
air and caught him again several times. Then they did the
same to the colonel. Then, to the accompaniment of the
band, the colonel himself danced with Petritsky. Then the
colonel, who began to show signs of feebleness, sat down
on a bench in the courtyard and began demonstrating to
Yashvin the superiority of Russia over Poland, especially
in cavalry attack, and there was a lull in the revelry for a
Anna Karenina
677 of 1759
moment. Serpuhovskoy went into the house to the
bathroom to wash his hands and found Vronsky there;
Vronsky was drenching his head with water. He had taken
off his coat and put his sunburnt, hairy neck under the tap,
and was rubbing it and his head with his hands. When he
had finished, Vronsky sat down by Serpuhovskoy. They
both sat down in the bathroom on a lounge, and a
conversation began which was very interesting to both of
them.
‘I’ve always been hearing about you through my wife,’
said Serpuhovskoy. ‘I’m glad you’ve been seeing her
pretty often.’
‘She’s friendly with Varya, and they’re the only women
in Petersburg I care about seeing,’ answered Vronsky,
smiling. He smiled because he foresaw the topic the
conversation would turn on, and he was glad of it.
‘The only ones?’ Serpuhovskoy queried, smiling.
‘Yes; and I heard news of you, but not only through
your wife,’ said Vronsky, checking his hint by a stern
expression of face. ‘I was greatly delighted to hear of your
success, but not a bit surprised. I expected even more.’
Serpuhovskoy smiled. Such an opinion of him was
obviously agreeable to him, and he did not think it
necessary to conceal it.
Anna Karenina
678 of 1759
‘Well, I on the contrary expected less—I’ll own
frankly. But I’m glad, very glad. I’m ambitious; that’s my
weakness, and I confess to it.’
‘Perhaps you wouldn’t confess to it if you hadn’t been
successful,’ said Vronsky.
‘I don’t suppose so,’ said Serpuhovskoy, smiling again.
‘I won’t say life wouldn’t be worth living without it, but it
would be dull. Of course I may be mistaken, but I fancy I
have a certain capacity for the line I’ve chosen, and that
power of any sort in my hands, if it is to be, will be better
than in the hands of a good many people I know,’ said
Serpuhovskoy, with beaming consciousness of success;
‘and so the nearer I get to it, the better pleased I am.’
‘Perhaps that is true for you, but not for everyone. I
used to think so too, but here I live and think life worth
living not only for that.’
‘There it’s out! here it comes!’ said Serpuhovskoy,
laughing. ‘Ever since I heard about you, about your
refusal, I began.... Of course, I approved of what you did.
But there are ways of doing everything. And I think your
action was good in itself, but you didn’t do it quite in the
way you ought to have done.’
Anna Karenina
679 of 1759
‘What’s done can’t be undone, and you know I never
go back on what I’ve done. And besides, I’m very well
off.’
‘Very well off—for the time. But you’re not satisfied
with that. I wouldn’t say this to your brother. He’s a nice
child, like our host here. There he goes!’ he added,
listening to the roar of ‘hurrah!’—‘and he’s happy, but that
does not satisfy you.’
‘I didn’t say it did satisfy me.’
‘Yes, but that’s not the only thing. Such men as you are
wanted.’
‘By whom?’
‘By whom? By society, by Russia. Russia needs men;
she needs a party, or else everything goes and will go to
the dogs.’
‘How do you mean? Bertenev’s party against the
Russian communists?’
‘No,’ said Serpuhovskoy, frowning with vexation at
being suspected of such an absurdity. ‘Tout ca est une
blague. That’s always been and always will be. There are
no communists. But intriguing people have to invent a
noxious, dangerous party. It’s an old trick. No, what’s
wanted is a powerful party of independent men like you
and me.’
Anna Karenina
680 of 1759
‘But why so?’ Vronsky mentioned a few men who
were in power. ‘Why aren’t they independent men?’
‘Simply because they have not, or have not had from
birth, an independent fortune; they’ve not had a name,
they’ve not been close to the sun and center as we have.
They can be bought either by money or by favor. And
they have to find a support for themselves in inventing a
policy. And they bring forward some notion, some policy
that they don’t believe in, that does harm; and the whole
policy is really only a means to a government house and so
much income. Cela n’est pas plus fin que ca, when you
get a peep at their cards. I may be inferior to them,
stupider perhaps, though I don’t see why I should be
inferior to them. But you and I have one important
advantage over them for certain, in being more difficult to
buy. And such men are more needed than ever.’
Vronsky listened attentively, but he was not so much
interested by the meaning of the words as by the attitude
of Serpuhovskoy who was already contemplating a
struggle with the existing powers, and already had his likes
and dislikes in that higher world, while his own interest in
the governing world did not go beyond the interests of his
regiment. Vronsky felt, too, how powerful Serpuhovskoy
might become through his unmistakable faculty for
Anna Karenina
681 of 1759
thinking things out and for taking things in, through his
intelligence and gift of words, so rarely met with in the
world in which he moved. And, ashamed as he was of the
feeling, he felt envious.
‘Still I haven’t the one thing of most importance for
that,’ he answered; ‘I haven’t the desire for power. I had it
once, but it’s gone.’
‘Excuse me, that’s not true,’ said Serpuhovskoy,
smiling.
‘Yes, it is true, it is true...now!’ Vronsky added, to be
truthful.
‘Yes, it’s true now, that’s another thing; but that NOW
won’t last forever.’
‘Perhaps,’ answered Vronsky.
‘You say PERHAPS,’ Serpuhovskoy went on, as
though guessing his thoughts, ‘but I say FOR CERTAIN.
And that’s what I wanted to see you for. Your action was
just what it should have been. I see that, but you ought
not to keep it up. I only ask you to give me carte blanche.
I’m not going to offer you my protection...though,
indeed, why shouldn’t I protect you?— you’ve protected
me often enough! I should hope our friendship rises above
all that sort of thing. Yes,’ he said, smiling to him as
Anna Karenina
682 of 1759
tenderly as a woman, ‘give me carte blanche, retire from
the regiment, and I’ll draw you upwards imperceptibly.’
‘But you must understand that I want nothing,’ said
Vronsky, ‘except that all should be as it is.’
Serpuhovskoy got up and stood facing him.
‘You say that all should be as it is. I understand what
that means. But listen: we’re the same age, you’ve known
a greater number of women perhaps than I have.’
Serpohovskoy’s smile and gestures told Vronsky that he
mustn’t be afraid, that he would be tender and careful in
touching the sore place. ‘But I’m married, and believe me,
in getting to know thoroughly one’s wife, if one loves her,
as someone has said, one gets to know all women better
than if one knew thousands of them.’
‘We’re coming directly!’ Vronsky shouted to an officer,
who looked into the room and called them to the colonel.
Vronsky was longing now to hear to the end and know
what Serpuhovskey would say to him.
‘And here’s my opinion for you. Women are the chief
stumbling block in a man’s career. It’s hard to love a
woman and do anything. There’s only one way of having
love conveniently without its being a hindrance—that’s
marriage. How, how am I to tell you what I mean?’ said
Serpuhovskoy, who liked similes. ‘Wait a minute, wait a
Anna Karenina
683 of 1759
minute! Yes, just as you can only carry a fardeau and do
something with your hands, when the fardeau is tied on
your back, and that’s marriage. And that’s what I felt when
I was married. My hands were suddenly set free. But to
drag that fardeau about with you without marriage, your
hands will always be so full that you can do nothing. Look
at Mazankov, at Krupov. They’ve ruined their careers for
the sake of women.’
‘What women!’ said Vronsky, recalling the
Frenchwoman and the actress with whom the two men he
had mentioned were connected.
‘The firmer the woman’s footing in society, the worse
it is. That’s much the same as—not merely carrying the
fardeau in your arms—but tearing it away from someone
else.’
‘You have never loved,’ Vronsky said softly, looking
straight before him and thinking of Anna.
‘Perhaps. But you remember what I’ve said to you.
And another thing, women are all more materialistic than
men. We make something immense out of love, but they
are always terre-a-terre.’
‘Directly, directly!’ he cried to a footman who came in.
But the footman had not come to call them again, as he
supposed. The footman brought Vronsky a note.
Anna Karenina
684 of 1759
‘A man brought it from Princess Tverskaya.’
Vronsky opened the letter, and flushed crimson.
‘My head’s begun to ache; I’m going home,’ he said to
Serpuhovskoy.
‘Oh, good-bye then. You give me carte blanche!’
‘We’ll talk about it later on; I’ll look you up in
Petersburg.’
Anna Karenina
685 of 1759
Chapter 22
It was six o’clock already, and so, in order to be there
quickly, and at the same time not to drive with his own
horses, known to everyone, Vronsky got into Yashvin’s
hired fly, and told the driver to drive as quickly as possible.
It was a roomy, old-fashioned fly, with seats for four. He
sat in one corner, stretched his legs out on the front seat,
and sank into meditation.
A vague sense of the order into which his affairs had
been brought, a vague recollection of the friendliness and
flattery of Serpuhovskoy, who had considered him a man
that was needed, and most of all, the anticipation of the
interview before him—all blended into a general, joyous
sense of life. This feeling was so strong that he could not
help smiling. He dropped his legs, crossed one leg over the
other knee, and taking it in his hand, felt the springy
muscle of the calf, where it had been grazed the day
before by his fall, and leaning back he drew several deep
breaths.
‘I’m happy, very happy!’ he said to himself. He had
often before had this sense of physical joy in his own
body, but he had never felt so fond of himself, of his own
Anna Karenina
686 of 1759
body, as at that moment. He enjoyed the slight ache in his
strong leg, he enjoyed the muscular sensation of
movement in his chest as he breathed. The bright, cold
August day, which had made Anna feel so hopeless,
seemed to him keenly stimulating, and refreshed his face
and neck that still tingled from the cold water. The scent
of brilliantine on his whiskers struck him as particularly
pleasant in the fresh air. Everything he saw from the
carriage window, everything in that cold pure air, in the
pale light of the sunset, was as fresh, and gay, and strong as
he was himself: the roofs of the houses shining in the rays
of the setting sun, the sharp outlines of fences and angles
of buildings, the figures of passers-by, the carriages that
met him now and then, the motionless green of the trees
and grass, the fields with evenly drawn furrows of
potatoes, and the slanting shadows that fell from the
houses, and trees, and bushes, and even from the rows of
potatoes—everything was bright like a pretty landscape
just finished and freshly varnished.
‘Get on, get on!’ he said to the driver, putting his head
out of the window, and pulling a three-rouble note out of
his pocket he handed it to the man as he looked round.
The driver’s hand fumbled with something at the lamp,
Anna Karenina
687 of 1759
the whip cracked, and the carriage rolled rapidly along the
smooth highroad.
‘I want nothing, nothing but this happiness,’ he
thought, staring at the bone button of the bell in the space
between the windows, and picturing to himself Anna just
as he had seen her last time. ‘And as I go on, I love her
more and more. Here’s the garden of the Vrede Villa.
Whereabouts will she be? Where? How? Why did she fix
on this place to meet me, and why does she write in
Betsy’s letter?’ he thought, wondering now for the first
time at it. But there was now no time for wonder. He
called to the driver to stop before reaching the avenue,
and opening the door, jumped out of the carriage as it was
moving, and went into the avenue that led up to the
house. There was no one in the avenue; but looking
round to the right he caught sight of her. Her face was
hidden by a veil, but he drank in with glad eyes the special
movement in walking, peculiar to her alone, the slope of
the shoulders, and the setting of the head, and at once a
sort of electric shock ran all over him. With fresh force, he
felt conscious of himself from the springy motions of his
legs to the movements of his lungs as he breathed, and
something set his lips twitching.
Joining him, she pressed his hand tightly.
Anna Karenina
688 of 1759
‘You’re not angry that I sent for you? I absolutely had
to see you,’ she said; and the serious and set line of her
lips, which he saw under the veil, transformed his mood at
once.
‘I angry! But how have you come, where from?’
‘Never mind,’ she said, laying her hand on his, ‘come
along, I must talk to you.’
He saw that something had happened, and that the
interview would not be a joyous one. In her presence he
had no will of his own: without knowing the grounds of
her distress, he already felt the same distress unconsciously
passing over him.
‘What is it? what?’ he asked her, squeezing her hand
with his elbow, and trying to read her thoughts in her
face.
She walked on a few steps in silence, gathering up her
courage; then suddenly she stopped.
‘I did not tell you yesterday,’ she began, breathing
quickly and painfully, ‘that coming home with Alexey
Alexandrovitch I told him everything...told him I could
not be his wife, that...and told him everything.’
He heard her, unconsciously bending his whole figure
down to her as though hoping in this way to soften the
hardness of her position for her. But directly she had said
Anna Karenina
689 of 1759
this he suddenly drew himself up, and a proud and hard
expression came over his face.
‘Yes, yes, that’s better, a thousand times better! I know
how painful it was,’ he said. But she was not listening to
his words, she was reading his thoughts from the
expression of his face. She could not guess that that
expression arose from the first idea that presented itself to
Vronsky—that a duel was now inevitable. The idea of a
duel had never crossed her mind, and so she put a different
interpretation on this passing expression of hardness.
When she got her husband’s letter, she knew then at
the bottom of her heart that everything would go on in
the old way, that she would not have the strength of will
to forego her position, to abandon her son, and to join her
lover. The morning spent at Princess Tverskaya’s had
confirmed her still more in this. But this interview was still
of the utmost gravity for her. She hoped that this
interview would transform her position, and save her. If
on hearing this news he were to say to her resolutely,
passionately, without an instant’s wavering: ‘Throw up
everything and come with me!’ she would give up her son
and go away with him. But this news had not produced
what she had expected in him; he simply seemed as
though he were resenting some affront.
Anna Karenina
690 of 1759
‘It was not in the least painful to me. It happened of
itself,’ she said irritably; ‘and see...’ she pulled her
husband’s letter out of her glove.
‘I understand, I understand,’ he interrupted her, taking
the letter, but not reading it, and trying to soothe her.
‘The one thing I longed for, the one thing I prayed for,
was to cut short this position, so as to devote my life to
your happiness.’
‘Why do you tell me that?’ she said. ‘Do you suppose I
can doubt it? If I doubted..’
‘Who’s that coming?’ said Vronsky suddenly, pointing
to two ladies walking towards them. ‘Perhaps they know
us!’ and he hurriedly turned off, drawing her after him
into a side path.
‘Oh, I don’t care!’ she said. Her lips were quivering.
And he fancied that her eyes looked with strange fury at
him from under the veil. ‘I tell you that’s not the point—I
can’t doubt that; but see what he writes to me. Read it.’
She stood still again.
Again, just as at the first moment of hearing of her
rupture with her husband, Vronsky, on reading the letter,
was unconsciously carried away by the natural sensation
aroused in him by his own relation to the betrayed
husband. Now while he held his letter in his hands, he
Anna Karenina
691 of 1759
could not help picturing the challenge, which he would
most likely find at home today or tomorrow, and the duel
itself in which, with the same cold and haughty expression
that his face was assuming at this moment he would await
the injured husband’s shot, after having himself fired into
the air. And at that instant there flashed across his mind
the thought of what Serpuhovskoy had just said to him,
and what he had himself been thinking in the morning—
that it was better not to bind himself —and he knew that
this thought he could not tell her.
Having read the letter, he raised his eyes to her, and
there was no determination in them. She saw at once that
he had been thinking about it before by himself. She knew
that whatever he might say to her, he would not say all he
thought. And she knew that her last hope had failed her.
This was not what she had been reckoning on.
‘You see the sort of man he is,’ she said, with a shaking
voice; ‘he..’
‘Forgive me, but I rejoice at it,’ Vronsky interrupted.
‘For God’s sake, let me finish!’ he added, his eyes
imploring her to give him time to explain his words. ‘I
rejoice, because things cannot, cannot possibly remain as
he supposes.’
Anna Karenina
692 of 1759
‘Why can’t they?’ Anna said, restraining her tears, and
obviously attaching no sort of consequence to what he
said. She felt that her fate was sealed.
Vronsky meant that after the duel—inevitable, he
thought— things could not go on as before, but he said
something different.
‘It can’t go on. I hope that now you will leave him. I
hope’— he was confused, and reddened—‘that you will
let me arrange and plan our life. Tomorrow...’ he was
beginning.
She did not let him go on.
‘But my child!’ she shrieked. ‘You see what he writes! I
should have to leave him, and I can’t and won’t do that.’
‘But, for God’s sake, which is better?—leave your
child, or keep up this degrading position?’
‘To whom is it degrading?’
‘To all, and most of all to you.’
‘You say degrading...don’t say that. Those words have
no meaning for me,’ she said in a shaking voice. She did
not want him now to say what was untrue. She had
nothing left her but his love, and she wanted to love him.
‘Don’t you understand that from the day I loved you
everything has changed for me? For me there is one thing,
and one thing only—your love. If that’s mine, I feel so
Anna Karenina
693 of 1759
exalted, so strong, that nothing can be humiliating to me.
I am proud of my position, because...proud of being...
proud....’ She could not say what she was proud of. Tears
of shame and despair choked her utterance. She stood still
and sobbed.
He felt, too, something swelling in his throat and
twitching in his nose, and for the first time in his life he
felt on the point of weeping. He could not have said
exactly what it was touched him so. He felt sorry for her,
and he felt he could not help her, and with that he knew
that he was to blame for her wretchedness, and that he had
done something wrong.
‘Is not a divorce possible?’ he said feebly. She shook her
head, not answering. ‘Couldn’t you take your son, and still
leave him?’
‘Yes; but it all depends on him. Now I must go to
him,’ she said shortly. Her presentiment that all would
again go on in the old way had not deceived her.
‘On Tuesday I shall be in Petersburg, and everything
can be settled.’
‘Yes,’ she said. ‘But don’t let us talk any more of it.’
Anna’s carriage, which she had sent away, and ordered
to come back to the little gate of the Vrede garden, drove
up. Anna said good-bye to Vronsky, and drove home.
Anna Karenina
694 of 1759
Chapter 23
On Monday there was the usual sitting of the
Commission of the 2nd of June. Alexey Alexandrovitch
walked into the hall where the sitting was held, greeted
the members and the president, as usual, and sat down in
his place, putting his hand on the papers laid ready before
him. Among these papers lay the necessary evidence and a
rough outline of the speech he intended to make. But he
did not really need these documents. He remembered
every point, and did not think it necessary to go over in
his memory what he would say. He knew that when the
time came, and when he saw his enemy facing him, and
studiously endeavoring to assume an expression of
indifference, his speech would flow of itself better than he
could prepare it now. He felt that the import of his speech
was of such magnitude that every word of it would have
weight. Meantime, as he listened to the usual report, he
had the most innocent and inoffensive air. No one,
looking at his white hands, with their swollen veins and
long fingers, so softly stroking the edges of the white paper
that lay before him, and at the air of weariness with which
his head drooped on one side, would have suspected that
Anna Karenina
695 of 1759
in a few minutes a torrent of words would flow from his
lips that would arouse a fearful storm, set the members
shouting and attacking one another, and force the
president to call for order. When the report was over,
Alexey Alexandrovitch announced in his subdued, delicate
voice that he had several points to bring before the
meeting in regard to the Commission for the
Reorganization of the Native Tribes. All attention was
turned upon him. Alexey Alexandrovitch cleared his
throat, and not looking at his opponent, but selecting, as
he always did while he was delivering his speeches, the
first person sitting opposite him, an inoffensive little old
man, who never had an opinion of any sort in the
Commission, began to expound his views. When he
reached the point about the fundamental and radical law,
his opponent jumped up and began to protest. Stremov,
who was also a member of the Commission, and also
stung to the quick, began defending himself, and
altogether a stormy sitting followed; but Alexey
Alexandrovitch triumphed, and his motion was carried,
three new commissions were appointed, and the next day
in a certain Petersburg circle nothing else was talked of but
this sitting. Alexey Alexandrovitch’s success had been even
greater than he had anticipated.
Anna Karenina
696 of 1759
Next morning, Tuesday, Alexey Alexandrovitch, on
waking up, recollected with pleasure his triumph of the
previous day, and he could not help smiling, though he
tried to appear indifferent, when the chief secretary of his
department, anxious to flatter him, informed him of the
rumors that had reached him concerning what had
happened in the Commission.
Absorbed in business with the chief secretary, Alexey
Alexandrovitch had completely forgotten that it was
Tuesday, the day fixed by him for the return of Anna
Arkadyevna, and he was surprised and received a shock of
annoyance when a servant came in to inform him of her
arrival.
Anna had arrived in Petersburg early in the morning;
the carriage had been sent to meet her in accordance with
her telegram, and so Alexey Alexandrovitch might have
known of her arrival. But when she arrived, he did not
meet her. She was told that he had not yet gone out, but
was busy with his secretary. She sent word to her husband
that she had come, went to her own room, and occupied
herself in sorting out her things, expecting he would come
to her. But an hour passed; he did not come. She went
into the dining room on the pretext of giving some
directions, and spoke loudly on purpose, expecting him to
Anna Karenina
697 of 1759
come out there; but he did not come, though she heard
him go to the door of his study as he parted from the chief
secretary. She knew that he usually went out quickly to
his office, and she wanted to see him before that, so that
their attitude to one another might be defined.
She walked across the drawing room and went
resolutely to him. When she went into his study he was in
official uniform, obviously ready to go out, sitting at a
little table on which he rested his elbows, looking
dejectedly before him. She saw him before he saw her,
and she saw that he was thinking of her.
On seeing her, he would have risen, but changed his
mind, then his face flushed hotly—a thing Anna had never
seen before, and he got up quickly and went to meet her,
looking not at her eyes, but above them at her forehead
and hair. He went up to her, took her by the hand, and
asked her to sit down.
‘I am very glad you have come,’ he said, sitting down
beside her, and obviously wishing to say something, he
stuttered. Several times he tried to begin to speak, but
stopped. In spite of the fact that, preparing herself for
meeting him, she had schooled herself to despise and
reproach him, she did not know what to say to him, and
she felt sorry for him. And so the silence lasted for some
Anna Karenina
698 of 1759
time. ‘Is Seryozha quite well?’ he said, and not waiting for
an answer, he added: ‘I shan’t be dining at home today,
and I have got to go out directly.’
‘I had thought of going to Moscow,’ she said.
‘No, you did quite, quite right to come,’ he said, and
was silent again.
Seeing that he was powerless to begin the conversation,
she began herself.
‘Alexey Alexandrovitch,’ she said, looking at him and
not dropping her eyes under his persistent gaze at her hair,
‘I’m a guilty woman, I’m a bad woman, but I am the same
as I was, as I told you then, and I have come to tell you
that I can change nothing.’
‘I have asked you no question about that,’ he said, all at
once, resolutely and with hatred looking her straight in the
face; ‘that was as I had supposed.’ Under the influence of
anger he apparently regained complete possession of all his
faculties. ‘But as I told you then, and have written to you,’
he said in a thin, shrill voice, ‘I repeat now, that I am not
bound to know this. I ignore it. Not all wives are so kind
as you, to be in such a hurry to communicate such
agreeable news to their husbands.’ He laid special emphasis
on the word ‘agreeable.’ ‘I shall ignore it so long as the
world knows nothing of it, so long as my name is not
Anna Karenina
699 of 1759
disgraced. And so I simply inform you that our relations
must be just as they have always been, and that only in the
event of your compromising me I shall be obliged to take
steps to secure my honor.’
‘But our relations cannot be the same as always,’ Anna
began in a timid voice, looking at him with dismay.
When she saw once more those composed gestures,
heard that shrill, childish, and sarcastic voice, her aversion
for him extinguished her pity for him, and she felt only
afraid, but at all costs she wanted to make clear her
position.
‘I cannot be your wife while I...’ she began.
He laughed a cold and malignant laugh.
‘The manner of life you have chosen is reflected, I
suppose, in your ideas. I have too much respect or
contempt, or both...I respect your past and despise your
present...that I was far from the interpretation you put on
my words.’
Anna sighed and bowed her head.
‘Though indeed I fail to comprehend how, with the
independence you show,’ he went on, getting hot, ‘—
announcing your infidelity to your husband and seeing
nothing reprehensible in it, apparently—you can see
Anna Karenina
700 of 1759
anything reprehensible in performing a wife’s duties in
relation to your husband.’
‘Alexey Alexandrovitch! What is it you want of me?’
‘I want you not to meet that man here, and to conduct
yourself so that neither the world nor the servants can
reproach you...not to see him. That’s not much, I think.
And in return you will enjoy all the privileges of a faithful
wife without fulfilling her duties. That’s all I have to say to
you. Now it’s time for me to go. I’m not dining at home.’
He got up and moved towards the door.
Anna got up too. Bowing in silence, he let her pass
before him.
Anna Karenina
701 of 1759
Chapter 24
The night spent by Levin on the haycock did not pass
without result for him. The way in which he had been
managing his land revolted him and had lost all attraction
for him. In spite of the magnificent harvest, never had
there been, or, at least, never it seemed to him, had there
been so many hindrances and so many quarrels between
him and the peasants as that year, and the origin of these
failures and this hostility was now perfectly
comprehensible to him. The delight he had experienced in
the work itself, and the consequent greater intimacy with
the peasants, the envy he felt of them, of their life, the
desire to adopt that life, which had been to him that night
not a dream but an intention, the execution of which he
had thought out in detail —all this had so transformed his
view of the farming of the land as he had managed it, that
he could not take his former interest in it, and could not
help seeing that unpleasant relation between him and the
workspeople which was the foundation of it all. The herd
of improved cows such as Pava, the whole land ploughed
over and enriched, the nine level fields surrounded with
hedges, the two hundred and forty acres heavily manured,
Anna Karenina
702 of 1759
the seed sown in drills, and all the rest of it—it was all
splendid if only the work had been done for themselves,
or for themselves and comrades —people in sympathy
with them. But he saw clearly now (his work on a book of
agriculture, in which the chief element in husbandry was
to have been the laborer, greatly assisted him in this) that
the sort of farming he was carrying on was nothing but a
cruel and stubborn struggle between him and the laborers,
in which there was on one side—his side—a continual
intense effort to change everything to a pattern he
considered better; on the other side, the natural order of
things. And in the struggle he saw that with immense
expenditure of force on his side, and with no effort or
even intention on the other side, all that was attained was
that the work did not go to the liking of either side, and
that splendid tools, splendid cattle and land were spoiled
with no good to anyone. Worst of all, the energy
expended on this work was not simply wasted. He could
not help feeling now, since the meaning of this system had
become clear to him, that the aim of his energy was a
most unworthy one. In reality, what was the struggle
about? He was struggling for every farthing of his share
(and he could not help it, for he had only to relax his
efforts, and he would not have had the money to pay his
Anna Karenina
703 of 1759
laborers’ wages), while they were only struggling to be
able to do their work easily and agreeably, that is to say, as
they were used to doing it. It was for his interests that
every laborer should work as hard as possible, and that
while doing so he should keep his wits about him, so as to
try not to break the winnowing machines, the horse rakes,
the thrashing machines, that he should attend to what he
was doing. What the laborer wanted was to work as
pleasantly as possible, with rests, and above all, carelessly
and heedlessly, without thinking. That summer Levin saw
this at every step. He sent the men to mow some clover
for hay, picking out the worst patches where the clover
was overgrown with grass and weeds and of no use for
seed; again and again they mowed the best acres of clover,
justifying themselves by the pretense that the bailiff had
told them to, and trying to pacify him with the assurance
that it would be splendid hay; but he knew that it was
owing to those acres being so much easier to mow. He
sent out a hay machine for pitching the hay—it was
broken at the first row because it was dull work for a
peasant to sit on the seat in front with the great wings
waving above him. And he was told, ‘Don’t trouble, your
honor, sure, the womenfolks will pitch it quick enough.’
The ploughs were practically useless, because it never
Anna Karenina
704 of 1759
occurred to the laborer to raise the share when he turned
the plough, and forcing it round, he strained the horses
and tore up the ground, and Levin was begged not to
mind about it. The horses were allowed to stray into the
wheat because not a single laborer would consent to be
night-watchman, and in spite of orders to the contrary, the
laborers insisted on taking turns for night duty, and Ivan,
after working all day long, fell asleep, and was very
penitent for his fault, saying, ‘Do what you will to me,
your honor.’
They killed three of the best calves by letting them into
the clover aftermath without care as to their drinking, and
nothing would make the men believe that they had been
blown out by the clover, but they told him, by way of
consolation, that one of his neighbors had lost a hundred
and twelve head of cattle in three days. All this happened,
not because anyone felt ill-will to Levin or his farm; on
the contrary, he knew that they liked him, thought him a
simple gentleman (their highest praise); but it happened
simply because all they wanted was to work merrily and
carelessly, and his interests were not only remote and
incomprehensible to them, but fatally opposed to their
most just claims. Long before, Levin had felt dissatisfaction
with his own position in regard to the land. He saw where
Anna Karenina
705 of 1759
his boat leaked, but he did not look for the leak, perhaps
purposely deceiving himself. (Nothing would be left him
if he lost faith in it.) But now he could deceive himself no
longer. The farming of the land, as he was managing it,
had become not merely unattractive but revolting to him,
and he could take no further interest in it.
To this now was joined the presence, only twenty-five
miles off, of Kitty Shtcherbatskaya, whom he longed to
see and could not see. Darya Alexandrovna Oblonskaya
had invited him, when he was over there, to come; to
come with the object of renewing his offer to her sister,
who would, so she gave him to understand, accept him
now. Levin himself had felt on seeing Kitty
Shtcherbatskaya that he had never ceased to love her; but
he could not go over to the Oblonskys’, knowing she was
there. The fact that he had made her an offer, and she had
refused him, had placed an insuperable barrier between her
and him. ‘I can’t ask her to be my wife merely because she
can’t be the wife of the man she wanted to marry,’ he said
to himself. The thought of this made him cold and hostile
to her. ‘I should not be able to speak to her without a
feeling of reproach; I could not look at her without
resentment; and she will only hate me all the more, as
she’s bound to. And besides, how can I now, after what
Anna Karenina
706 of 1759
Darya Alexandrovna told me, go to see them? Can I help
showing that I know what she told me? And me to go
magnanimously to forgive her, and have pity on her! Me
go through a performance before her of forgiving, and
deigning to bestow my love on her!... What induced
Darya Alexandrovna to tell me that? By chance I might
have seen her, then everything would have happened of
itself; but, as it is, it’s out of the question, out of the
question!’
Darya Alexandrovna sent him a letter, asking him for a
side-saddle for Kitty’s use. ‘I’m told you have a sidesaddle,’ she wrote to him; ‘I hope you will bring it over
yourself.’
This was more than he could stand. How could a
woman of any intelligence, of any delicacy, put her sister
in such a humiliating position! He wrote ten notes, and
tore them all up, and sent the saddle without any reply.
To write that he would go was impossible, because he
could not go; to write that he could not come because
something prevented him, or that he would be away, that
was still worse. He sent the saddle without an answer, and
with a sense of having done something shameful; he
handed over all the now revolting business of the estate to
the bailiff, and set off next day to a remote district to see
Anna Karenina
707 of 1759
his friend Sviazhsky, who had splendid marshes for grouse
in his neighborhood, and had lately written to ask him to
keep a long-standing promise to stay with him. The
grouse-marsh, in the Surovsky district, had long tempted
Levin, but he had continually put off this visit on account
of his work on the estate. Now he was glad to get away
from the neighborhood of the Shtcherbatskys, and still
more from his farm work, especially on a shooting
expedition, which always in trouble served as the best
consolation.
Anna Karenina
708 of 1759
Chapter 25
In the Surovsky district there was no railway nor
service of post horses, and Levin drove there with his own
horses in his big, old-fashioned carriage.
He stopped halfway at a well-to-do peasant’s to feed his
horses. A bald, well-preserved old man, with a broad, red
beard, gray on his cheeks, opened the gate, squeezing
against the gatepost to let the three horses pass. Directing
the coachman to a place under the shed in the big, clean,
tidy yard, with charred, old-fashioned ploughs in it, the
old man asked Levin to come into the parlor. A cleanly
dressed young woman, with clogs on her bare feet, was
scrubbing the floor in the new outer room. She was
frightened of the dog, that ran in after Levin, and uttered a
shriek, but began laughing at her own fright at once when
she was told the dog would not hurt her. Pointing Levin
with her bare arm to the door into the parlor, she bent
down again, hiding her handsome face, and went on
scrubbing.
‘Would you like the samovar?’ she asked.
‘Yes, please.’
Anna Karenina
709 of 1759
The parlor was a big room, with a Dutch stove, and a
screen dividing it into two. Under the holy pictures stood
a table painted in patterns, a bench, and two chairs. Near
the entrance was a dresser full of crockery. The shutters
were closed, there were few flies, and it was so clean that
Levin was anxious that Laska, who had been running
along the road and bathing in puddles, should not muddy
the floor, and ordered her to a place in the corner by the
door. After looking round the parlor, Levin went out in
the back yard. The good-looking young woman in clogs,
swinging the empty pails on the yoke, ran on before him
to the well for water.
‘Look sharp, my girl!’ the old man shouted after her,
good-humoredly, and he went up to Levin. ‘Well, sir, are
you going to Nikolay Ivanovitch Sviazhsky? His honor
comes to us too,’ he began, chatting, leaning his elbows
on the railing of the steps. In the middle of the old man’s
account of his acquaintance with Sviazhsky, the gates
creaked again, and laborers came into the yard from the
fields, with wooden ploughs and harrows. The horses
harnessed to the ploughs and harrows were sleek and fat.
The laborers were obviously of the household: two were
young men in cotton shirts and caps, the two others were
hired laborers in homespun shirts, one an old man, the
Anna Karenina
710 of 1759
other a young fellow. Moving off from the steps, the old
man went up to the horses and began unharnessing them.
‘What have they been ploughing?’ asked Levin.
‘Ploughing up the potatoes. We rent a bit of land too.
Fedot, don’t let out the gelding, but take it to the trough,
and we’ll put the other in harness.’
‘Oh, father, the ploughshares I ordered, has he brought
them along?’ asked the big, healthy-looking fellow,
obviously the old man’s son.
‘There...in the outer room,’ answered the old man,
bundling together the harness he had taken off, and
flinging it on the ground. ‘You can put them on, while
they have dinner.’
The good-looking young woman came into the outer
room with the full pails dragging at her shoulders. More
women came on the scene from somewhere, young and
handsome, middle-aged, old and ugly, with children and
without children.
The samovar was beginning to sing; the laborers and
the family, having disposed of the horses, came in to
dinner. Levin, getting his provisions out of his carriage,
invited the old man to take tea with him.
Anna Karenina
711 of 1759
‘Well, I have had some today already,’ said the old
man, obviously accepting the invitation with pleasure.
‘But just a glass for company.’
Over their tea Levin heard all about the old man’s
farming. Ten years before, the old man had rented three
hundred acres from the lady who owned them, and a year
ago he had bought them and rented another three
hundred from a neighboring landowner. A small part of
the land—the worst part—he let out for rent, while a
hundred acres of arable land he cultivated himself with his
family and two hired laborers. The old man complained
that things were doing badly. But Levin saw that he simply
did so from a feeling of propriety, and that his farm was in
a flourishing condition. If it had been unsuccessful he
would not have bought land at thirty-five roubles the acre,
he would not have married his three sons and a nephew,
he would not have rebuilt twice after fires, and each time
on a larger scale. In spite of the old man’s complaints, it
was evident that he was proud, and justly proud, of his
prosperity, proud of his sons, his nephew, his sons’ wives,
his horses and his cows, and especially of the fact that he
was keeping all this farming going. From his conversation
with the old man, Levin thought he was not averse to new
methods either. He had planted a great many potatoes, and
Anna Karenina
712 of 1759
his potatoes, as Levin had seen driving past, were already
past flowering and beginning to die down, while Levin’s
were only just coming into flower. He earthed up his
potatoes with a modern plough borrowed from a
neighboring landowner. He sowed wheat. The trifling fact
that, thinning out his rye, the old man used the rye he
thinned out for his horses, specially struck Levin. How
many times had Levin seen this splendid fodder wasted,
and tried to get it saved; but always it had turned out to be
impossible. The peasant got this done, and he could not
say enough in praise of it as food for the beasts.
‘What have the wenches to do? They carry it out in
bundles to the roadside, and the cart brings it away.’
‘Well, we landowners can’t manage well with our
laborers,’ said Levin, handing him a glass of tea.
‘Thank you,’ said the old man, and he took the glass,
but refused sugar, pointing to a lump he had left. ‘They’re
simple destruction,’ said he. ‘Look at Sviazhsky’s, for
instance. We know what the land’s like—first-rate, yet
there’s not much of a crop to boast of. It’s not looked after
enough—that’s all it is!’
‘But you work your land with hired laborers?’
Anna Karenina
713 of 1759
‘We’re all peasants together. We go into everything
ourselves. If a man’s no use, he can go, and we can
manage by ourselves.’
‘Father Finogen wants some tar,’ said the young
woman in the clogs, coming in.
‘Yes, yes, that’s how it is, sir!’ said the old man, getting
up, and crossing himself deliberately, he thanked Levin
and went out.
When Levin went into the kitchen to call his
coachman he saw the whole family at dinner. The women
were standing up waiting on them. The young, sturdylooking son was telling something funny with his mouth
full of pudding, and they were all laughing, the woman in
the clogs, who was pouring cabbage soup into a bowl,
laughing most merrily of all.
Very probably the good-looking face of the young
woman in the dogs had a good deal to do with the
impression of well-being this peasant household made
upon Levin, but the impression was so strong that Levin
could never get rid of it. And all the way from the old
peasant’s to Sviazhsky’s he kept recalling this peasant farm
as though there were something in this impression that
demanded his special attention.
Anna Karenina
714 of 1759
Chapter 26
Sviazhsky was the marshal of his district. He was five
years older than Levin, and had long been married. His
sister-in-law, a young girl Levin liked very much, lived in
his house; and Levin knew that Sviazhsky and his wife
would have greatly liked to marry the girl to him. He
knew this with certainty, as so-called eligible young men
always know it, though he could never have brought
himself to speak of it to anyone; and he knew too that,
although he wanted to get married, and although by every
token this very attractive girl would make an excellent
wife, he could no more have married her, even if he had
not been in love with Kitty Shtcherbatskaya, than he
could have flown up to the sky. And this knowledge
poisoned the pleasure he had hoped to find in the visit to
Sviazhsky.
On getting Sviazhsky’s letter with the invitation for
shooting, Levin had immediately thought of this; but in
spite of it he had made up his mind that Sviazhsky’s
having such views for him was simply his own groundless
supposition, and so he would go, all the same. Besides, at
the bottom of his heart he had a desire to try himself, put
Anna Karenina
715 of 1759
himself to the test in regard to this girl. The Sviazhskys’
home-life was exceedingly pleasant, and Sviazhsky himself,
the best type of man taking part in local affairs that Levin
knew, was very interesting to him.
Sviazhsky was one of those people, always a source of
wonder to Levin, whose convictions, very logical though
never original, go one way by themselves, while their life,
exceedingly definite and firm in its direction, goes its way
quite apart and almost always in direct contradiction to
their convictions. Sviazhsky was an extremely advanced
man. He despised the nobility, and believed the mass of
the nobility to be secretly in favor of serfdom, and only
concealing their views from cowardice. He regarded
Russia as a ruined country, rather after the style of Turkey,
and the government of Russia as so bad that he never
permitted himself to criticize its doings seriously, and yet
he was a functionary of that government and a model
marshal of nobility, and when he drove about he always
wore the cockade of office and the cap with the red band.
He considered human life only tolerable abroad, and went
abroad to stay at every opportunity, and at the same time
he carried on a complex and improved system of
agriculture in Russia, and with extreme interest followed
everything and knew everything that was being done in
Anna Karenina
716 of 1759
Russia. He considered the Russian peasant as occupying a
stage of development intermediate between the ape and
the man, and at the same time in the local assemblies no
one was readier to shake hands with the peasants and listen
to their opinion. He believed neither in God nor the
devil, but was much concerned about the question of the
improvement of the clergy and the maintenance of their
revenues, and took special trouble to keep up the church
in his village.
On the woman question he was on the side of the
extreme advocates of complete liberty for women, and
especially their right to labor. But he lived with his wife
on such terms that their affectionate childless home life
was the admiration of everyone, and arranged his wife’s
life so that she did nothing and could do nothing but share
her husband’s efforts that her time should pass as happily
and as agreeably as possible.
If it had not been a characteristic of Levin’s to put the
most favorable interpretation on people, Sviazhsky’s
character would have presented no doubt or difficulty to
him: he would have said to himself, ‘a fool or a knave,’
and everything would have seemed clear. But he could
not say ‘a fool,’ because Sviazhsky was unmistakably
clever, and moreover, a highly cultivated man, who was
Anna Karenina
717 of 1759
exceptionally modest over his culture. There was not a
subject he knew nothing of. But he did not display his
knowledge except when he was compelled to do so. Still
less could Levin say that he was a knave, as Sviazhsky was
unmistakably an honest, good-hearted, sensible man, who
worked good-humoredly, keenly, and perseveringly at his
work; he was held in high honor by everyone about him,
and certainly he had never consciously done, and was
indeed incapable of doing, anything base.
Levin tried to understand him, and could not
understand him, and looked at him and his life as at a
living enigma.
Levin and he were very friendly, and so Levin used to
venture to sound Sviazhsky, to try to get at the very
foundation of his view of life; but it was always in vain.
Every time Levin tried to penetrate beyond the outer
chambers of Sviazhsky’s mind, which were hospitably
open to all, he noticed that Sviazhsky was slightly
disconcerted; faint signs of alarm were visible in his eyes,
as though he were afraid Levin would understand him,
and he would give him a kindly, good-humored repulse.
Just now, since his disenchantment with farming, Levin
was particularly glad to stay with Sviazhsky. Apart from
the fact that the sight of this happy and affectionate
Anna Karenina
718 of 1759
couple, so pleased with themselves and everyone else, and
their well-ordered home had always a cheering effect on
Levin, he felt a longing, now that he was so dissatisfied
with his own life, to get at that secret in Sviazhsky that
gave him such clearness, definiteness, and good courage in
life. Moreover, Levin knew that at Sviazhsky’s he should
meet the landowners of the neighborhood, and it was
particularly interesting for him just now to hear and take
part in those rural conversations concerning crops,
laborers’ wages, and so on, which, he was aware, are
conventionally regarded as something very low, but which
seemed to him just now to constitute the one subject of
importance. ‘It was not, perhaps, of importance in the days
of serfdom, and it may not be of importance in England.
In both cases the conditions of agriculture are firmly
established; but among us now, when everything has been
turned upside down and is only just taking shape, the
question what form these conditions will take is the one
question of importance in Russia,’ thought Levin.
The shooting turned out to be worse than Levin had
expected. The marsh was dry and there were no grouse at
all. He walked about the whole day and only brought
back three birds, but to make up for that—he brought
back, as he always did from shooting, an excellent
Anna Karenina
719 of 1759
appetite, excellent spirits, and that keen, intellectual mood
which with him always accompanied violent physical
exertion. And while out shooting, when he seemed to be
thinking of nothing at all, suddenly the old man and his
family kept coming back to his mind, and the impression
of them seemed to claim not merely his attention, but the
solution of some question connected with them.
In the evening at tea, two landowners who had come
about some business connected with a wardship were of
the party, and the interesting conversation Levin had been
looking forward to sprang up.
Levin was sitting beside his hostess at the tea table, and
was obliged to keep up a conversation with her and her
sister, who was sitting opposite him. Madame Sviazhskaya
was a round-faced, fair-haired, rather short woman, all
smiles and dimples. Levin tried through her to get a
solution of the weighty enigma her husband presented to
his mind; but he had not complete freedom of ideas,
because he was in an agony of embarrassment. This agony
of embarrassment was due to the fact that the sister-in-law
was sitting opposite to him, in a dress, specially put on, as
he fancied, for his benefit, cut particularly open, in the
shape of a trapeze, on her white bosom. This quadrangular
opening, in spite of the bosom’s being very white, or just
Anna Karenina
720 of 1759
because it was very white, deprived Levin of the full use of
his faculties. He imagined, probably mistakenly, that this
low-necked bodice had been made on his account, and
felt that he had no right to look at it, and tried not to look
at it; but he felt that he was to blame for the very fact of
the low-necked bodice having been made. It seemed to
Levin that he had deceived someone, that he ought to
explain something, but that to explain it was impossible,
and for that reason he was continually blushing, was ill at
ease and awkward. His awkwardness infected the pretty
sister-in-law too. But their hostess appeared not to observe
this, and kept purposely drawing her into the
conversation.
‘You say,’ she said, pursuing the subject that had been
started, ‘that my husband cannot be interested in what’s
Russian. It’s quite the contrary; he is always in cheerful
spirits abroad, but not as he is here. Here, he feels in his
proper place. He has so much to do, and he has the faculty
of interesting himself in everything. Oh, you’ve not been
to see our school, have you?’
‘I’ve seen it.... The little house covered with ivy, isn’t
it?’
‘Yes; that’s Nastia’s work,’ she said, indicating her
sister.
Anna Karenina
721 of 1759
‘You teach in it yourself?’ asked Levin, trying to look
above the open neck, but feeling that wherever he looked
in that direction he should see it.
‘Yes; I used to teach in it myself, and do teach still, but
we have a first-rate schoolmistress now. And we’ve started
gymnastic exercises.’
‘No, thank you, I won’t have any more tea,’ said
Levin, and conscious of doing a rude thing, but incapable
of continuing the conversation, he got up, blushing. ‘I
hear a very interesting conversation,’ he added, and
walked to the other end of the table, where Sviazhsky was
sitting with the two gentlemen of the neighborhood.
Sviazhsky was sitting sideways, with one elbow on the
table, and a cup in one hand, while with the other hand
he gathered up his beard, held it to his nose and let it drop
again, as though he were smelling it. His brilliant black
eyes were looking straight at the excited country
gentleman with gray whiskers, and apparently he derived
amusement from his remarks. The gentleman was
complaining of the peasants. It was evident to Levin that
Sviazhsky knew an answer to this gentleman’s complaints,
which would at once demolish his whole contention, but
that in his position he could not give utterance to this
Anna Karenina
722 of 1759
answer, and listened, not without pleasure, to the
landowner’s comic speeches.
The gentleman with the gray whiskers was obviously
an inveterate adherent of serfdom and a devoted
agriculturist, who had lived all his life in the country.
Levin saw proofs of this in his dress, in the old-fashioned
threadbare coat, obviously not his everyday attire, in his
shrewd deep-set eyes, in his idiomatic, fluent Russian, in
the imperious tone that had become habitual from long
use, and in the resolute gestures of his large, red, sunburnt
hands, with an old betrothal ring on the little finger.
Anna Karenina
723 of 1759
Chapter 27
‘If I’d only the heart to throw up what’s been set
going...such a lot of trouble wasted...I’d turn my back on
the whole business, sell up, go off like Nikolay
Ivanovitch...to hear La Belle Helene,’ said the landowner,
a pleasant smile lighting up his shrewd old face.
‘But you see you don’t throw it up,’ said Nikolay
Ivanovitch Sviazhsky; ‘so there must be something
gained.’
‘The only gain is that I live in my own house, neither
bought nor hired. Besides, one keeps hoping the people
will learn sense. Though, instead of that, you’d never
believe it—the drunkenness, the immorality! They keep
chopping and changing their bits of land. Not a sight of a
horse or a cow. The peasant’s dying of hunger, but just go
and take him on as a laborer, he’ll do his best to do you a
mischief, and then bring you up before the justice of the
peace.’
‘But then you make complaints to the justice too,’ said
Sviazhsky.
‘I lodge complaints? Not for anything in the world!
Such a talking, and such a to-do, that one would have
Anna Karenina
724 of 1759
cause to regret it. At the works, for instance, they
pocketed the advance-money and made off. What did the
justice do? Why, acquitted them. Nothing keeps them in
order but their own communal court and their village
elder. He’ll flog them in the good old style! But for that
there’d be nothing for it but to give it all up and run
away.’
Obviously the landowner was chaffing Sviazhsky, who,
far from resenting it, was apparently amused by it.
‘But you see we manage our land without such
extreme measures,’ said he, smiling: ‘Levin and I and this
gentleman.’
He indicated the other landowner.
‘Yes, the thing’s done at Mihail Petrovitch’s, but ask
him how it’s done. Do you call that a rational system?’ said
the landowner, obviously rather proud of the word
‘rational.’
‘My system’s very simple,’ said Mihail Petrovitch,
‘thank God. All my management rests on getting the
money ready for the autumn taxes, and the peasants come
to me, ‘Father, master, help us!’ Well, the peasants are all
one’s neighbors; one feels for them. So one advances them
a third, but one says: ‘Remember, lads, I have helped you,
and you must help me when I need it—whether it’s the
Anna Karenina
725 of 1759
sowing of the oats, or the haycutting, or the harvest’; and
well, one agrees, so much for each taxpayer—though
there are dishonest ones among them too, it’s true.’
Levin, who had long been familiar with these
patriarchal methods, exchanged glances with Sviazhsky
and interrupted Mihail Petrovitch, turning again to the
gentleman with the gray whiskers.
‘Then what do you think?’ he asked; ‘what system is
one to adopt nowadays?’
‘Why, manage like Mihail Petrovitch, or let the land
for half the crop or for rent to the peasants; that one can
do—only that’s just how the general prosperity of the
country is being ruined. Where the land with serf-labor
and good management gave a yield of nine to one, on the
half-crop system it yields three to one. Russia has been
ruined by the emancipation!’
Sviazhsky looked with smiling eyes at Levin, and even
made a faint gesture of irony to him; but Levin did not
think the landowner’s words absurd, he understood them
better than he did Sviazhsky. A great deal more of what
the gentleman with the gray whiskers said to show in what
way Russia was ruined by the emancipation struck him
indeed as very true, new to him, and quite incontestable.
The landowner unmistakably spoke his own individual
Anna Karenina
726 of 1759
thought—a thing that very rarely happens—and a thought
to which he had been brought not by a desire of finding
some exercise for an idle brain, but a thought which had
grown up out of the conditions of his life, which he had
brooded over in the solitude of his village, and had
considered in every aspect.
‘The point is, don’t you see, that progress of every sort
is only made by the use of authority,’ he said, evidently
wishing to show he was not without culture. ‘Take the
reforms of Peter, of Catherine, of Alexander. Take
European history. And progress in agriculture more than
anything else—the potato, for instance, that was
introduced among us by force. The wooden plough too
wasn’t always used. It was introduced maybe in the days
before the Empire, but it was probably brought in by
force. Now, in our own day, we landowners in the serf
times used various improvements in our husbandry: drying
machines and thrashing machines, and carting manure and
all the modern implements—all that we brought into use
by our authority, and the peasants opposed it at first, and
ended by imitating us. Now by the abolition of serfdom
we have been deprived of our authority; and so our
husbandry, where it had been raised to a high level, is
Anna Karenina
727 of 1759
bound to sink to the most savage primitive condition.
That’s how I see it.’
‘But why so? If it’s rational, you’ll be able to keep up
the same system with hired labor,’ said Sviazhsky.
‘We’ve no power over them. With whom am I going
to work the system, allow me to ask?’
‘There it is—the labor force—the chief element in
agriculture,’ thought Levin.
‘With laborers.’
‘The laborers won’t work well, and won’t work with
good implements. Our laborer can do nothing but get
drunk like a pig, and when he’s drunk he ruins everything
you give him. He makes the horses ill with too much
water, cuts good harness, barters the tires of the wheels for
drink, drops bits of iron into the thrashing machine, so as
to break it. He loathes the sight of anything that’s not after
his fashion. And that’s how it is the whole level of
husbandry has fallen. Lands gone out of cultivation,
overgrown with weeds, or divided among the peasants,
and where millions of bushels were raised you get a
hundred thousand; the wealth of the country has
decreased. If the same thing had been done, but with care
that..’
Anna Karenina
728 of 1759
And he proceeded to unfold his own scheme of
emancipation by means of which these drawbacks might
have been avoided.
This did not interest Levin, but when he had finished,
Levin went back to his first position, and, addressing
Sviazhsky, and trying to draw him into expressing his
serious opinion:-
‘That the standard of culture is falling, and that with
our present relations to the peasants there is no possibility
of famling on a rational system to yield a profit—that’s
perfectly true,’ said he.
‘I don’t believe it,’ Sviazhsky replied quite seriously; ‘all
I see is that we don’t know how to cultivate the land, and
that our system of agriculture in the serf days was by no
means too high, but too low. We have no machines, no
good stock, no efficient supervision; we don’t even know
how to keep accounts. Ask any landowner; he won’t be
able to tell you what crop’s profitable, and what’s not.’
‘Italian bookkeeping,’ said the gentleman of the gray
whiskers ironically. ‘You may keep your books as you
like, but if they spoil everything for you, there won’t be
any profit.’
‘Why do they spoil things? A poor thrashing machine,
or your Russian presser, they will break, but my steam
Anna Karenina
729 of 1759
press they don’t break. A wretched Russian nag they’ll
ruin, but keep good dray-horses—they won’t ruin them.
And so it is all round. We must raise our farming to a
higher level.’
‘Oh, if one only had the means to do it, Nikolay
Ivanovitch! It’s all very well for you; but for me, with a
son to keep at the university, lads to be educated at the
high school—how am I going to buy these dray-horses?’
‘Well, that’s what the land banks are for.’
‘To get what’s left me sold by auction? No, thank you.’
‘I don’t agree that it’s necessary or possible to raise the
level of agriculture still higher,’ said Levin. ‘I devote
myself to it, and I have means, but I can do nothing. As to
the banks, I don’t know to whom they’re any good. For
my part, anyway, whatever I’ve spent money on in the
way of husbandry, it has been a loss: stock—a loss,
machinery—a loss.’
‘That’s true enough,’ the gentleman with the gray
whiskers chimed in, positively laughing with satisfaction.
‘And I’m not the only one,’ pursued Levin. ‘I mix with
all the neighboring landowners, who are cultivating their
land on a rational system; they all, with rare exceptions,
are doing so at a loss. Come, tell us how does your land
do—does it pay?’ said Levin, and at once in Sviazhsky’s
Anna Karenina
730 of 1759
eyes he detected that fleeting expression of alarm which he
had noticed whenever he had tried to penetrate beyond
the outer chambers of Sviazhsky’s mind.
Moreover, this question on Levin’s part was not quite
in good faith. Madame Sviazhskaya had just told him at tea
that they had that summer invited a Gemman expert in
bookkeeping from Moscow, who for a consideration of
five hundred roubles had investigated the management of
their property, and found that it was costing them a loss of
three thousand odd roubles. She did not remember the
precise sum, but it appeared that the Gemman had worked
it out to the fraction of a farthing.
The gray-whiskered landowner smiled at the mention
of the profits of Sviazhsky’s famling, obviously aware how
much gain his neighbor and marshal was likely to be
making.
‘Possibly it does not pay,’ answered Sviazhsky. ‘That
merely proves either that I’m a bad manager, or that I’ve
sunk my capital for the increase of my rents.’
‘Oh, rent!’ Levin cried with horror. ‘Rent there may
be in Europe, where land has been improved by the labor
put into it, but with us all the land is deteriorating from
the labor put into it—in other words they’re working it
out; so there’s no question of rent.’
Anna Karenina
731 of 1759
‘How no rent? It’s a law.’
‘Then we’re outside the law; rent explains nothing for
us, but simply muddles us. No, tell me how there can be a
theory of rent?..’
‘Will you have some junket? Masha, pass us some
junket or raspberries.’ He turned to his wife.
‘Extraordinarily late the raspberries are lasting this year.’
And in the happiest frame of mind Sviazhsky got up
and walked off, apparently supposing the conversation to
have ended at the very point when to Levin it seemed that
it was only just beginning.
Having lost his antagonist, Levin continued the
conversation with the gray-whiskered landowner, trying
to prove to him that all the difficulty arises from the fact
that we don’t find out the peculiarities and habits of our
laborer; but the landowner, like all men who think
independently and in isolation, was slow in taking in any
other person’s idea, and particularly partial to his own. He
stuck to it that the Russian peasant is a swine and likes
swinishness, and that to get him out of his swinishness one
must have authority, and there is none; one must have the
stick, and we have become so liberal that we have all of a
sudden replaced the stick that served us for a thousand
years by lawyers and model prisons, where the worthless,
Anna Karenina
732 of 1759
stinking peasant is fed on good soup and has a fixed
allowance of cubic feet of air.
‘What makes you think,’ said Levin, trying to get back
to the question, ‘that it’s impossible to find some relation
to the laborer in which the labor would become
productive?’
‘That never could be so with the Russian peasantry;
we’ve no power over them,’ answered the landowner.
‘How can new conditions be found?’ said Sviazhsky.
Having eaten some junket and lighted a cigarette, he came
back to the discussion. ‘All possible relations to the labor
force have been defined and studied,’ he said. ‘The relic of
barbarism, the primitive commune with each guarantee
for all, will disappear of itself; serfdom has been
abolished—there remains nothing but free labor, and its
fomms are fixed and ready made, and must be adopted.
Permanent hands, day-laborers, rammers—you can’t get
out of those forms.’
‘But Europe is dissatisfied with these forms.’
‘Dissatisfied, and seeking new ones. And will find
them, in all probability.’
‘That’s just what I was meaning,’ answered Levin.
‘Why shouldn’t we seek them for ourselves?’
Anna Karenina
733 of 1759
‘Because it would be just like inventing afresh the
means for constructing railways. They are ready,
invented.’
‘But if they don’t do for us, if they’re stupid?’ said
Levin.
And again he detected the expression of alarm in the
eyes of Sviazhsky.
‘Oh, yes; we’ll bury the world under our caps! We’ve
found the secret Europe was seeking for! I’ve heard all
that; but, excuse me, do you know all that’s been done in
Europe on the question of the organization of labor?’
‘No, very little.’
‘That question is now absorbing the best minds in
Europe. The Schulze-Delitsch movement.... And then all
this enormous literature of the labor question, the most
liberal Lassalle movement...the Mulhausen experiment?
That’s a fact by now, as you’re probably aware.’
‘I have some idea of it, but very vague.’
‘No, you only say that; no doubt you know all about it
as well as I do. I’m not a professor of sociology, of course,
but it interested me, and really, if it interests you, you
ought to study it.’
‘But what conclusion have they come to?’
‘Excuse me..’
Anna Karenina
734 of 1759
The two neighbors had risen, and Sviazhsky, once
more checking Levin in his inconvenient habit of peeping
into what was beyond the outer chambers of his mind,
went to see his guests out.
Anna Karenina
735 of 1759
Chapter 28
Levin was insufferably bored that evening with the
ladies; he was stirred as he had never been before by the
idea that the dissatisfaction he was feeling with his system
of managing his land was not an exceptional case, but the
general condition of things in Russia; that the organization
of some relation of the laborers to the soil in which they
would work, as with the peasant he had met half-way to
the Sviazhskys’, was not a dream, but a problem which
must be solved. And it seemed to him that the problem
could be solved, and that he ought to try and solve it.
After saying good-night to the ladies, and promising to
stay the whole of the next day, so as to make an
expedition on horseback with them to see an interesting
ruin in the crown forest, Levin went, before going to bed,
into his host’s study to get the books on the labor question
that Sviazhsky had offered him. Sviazhsky’s study was a
huge room, surrounded by bookcases and with two tables
in it—one a massive writing table, standing in the middle
of the room, and the other a round table, covered with
recent numbers of reviews and journals in different
languages, ranged like the rays of a star round the lamp.
Anna Karenina
736 of 1759
On the writing table was a stand of drawers marked with
gold lettering, and full of papers of various sorts.
Sviazhsky took out the books, and sat down in a
rocking-chair.
‘What are you looking at there?’ he said to Levin, who
was standing at the round table looking through the
reviews.
‘Oh, yes, there’s a very interesting article here,’ said
Sviazhsky of the review Levin was holding in his hand. ‘It
appears,’ he went on, with eager interest, ‘that Friedrich
was not, after all, the person chiefly responsible for the
partition of Poland. It is proved..’
And with his characteristic clearness, he summed up
those new, very important, and interesting revelations.
Although Levin was engrossed at the moment by his ideas
about the problem of the land, he wondered, as he heard
Sviazhsky: ‘What is there inside of him? And why, why is
he interested in the partition of Poland?’ When Sviazhsky
had finished, Levin could not help asking: ‘Well, and what
then?’ But there was nothing to follow. It was simply
interesting that it had been proved to be so and so. But
Sviazhsky did not explain, and saw no need to explain
why it was interesting to him.
Anna Karenina
737 of 1759
‘Yes, but I was very much interested by your irritable
neighbor,’ said Levin, sighing. ‘He’s a clever fellow, and
said a lot that was true.’
‘Oh, get along with you! An inveterate supporter of
serfdom at heart, like all of them!’ said Sviazhsky.
‘Whose marshal you are.’
‘Yes, only I marshal them in the other direction,’ said
Sviazhsky, laughing.
‘I’ll tell you what interests me very much,’ said Levin.
‘He’s right that our system, that’s to say of rational
farming, doesn’t answer, that the only thing that answers is
the money-lender system, like that meek-looking
gentleman’s, or else the very simplest.... Whose fault is it?’
‘Our own, of course. Besides, it’s not true that it
doesn’t answer. It answers with Vassiltchikov.’
‘A factory..’
‘But I really don’t know what it is you are surprised at.
The people are at such a low stage of rational and moral
development, that it’s obvious they’re bound to oppose
everything that’s strange to them. In Europe, a rational
system answers because the people are educated; it follows
that we must educate the people—that’s all.’
‘But how are we to educate the people?’
Anna Karenina
738 of 1759
‘To educate the people three things are needed:
schools, and schools, and schools.
‘But you said yourself the people are at such a low stage
of material development: what help are schools for that?’
‘Do you know, you remind me of the story of the
advice given to the sick man—You should try purgative
medicine. Taken: worse. Try leeches. Tried them: worse.
Well, then, there’s nothing left but to pray to God. Tried
it: worse. That’s just how it is with us. I say political
economy; you say—worse. I say socialism: worse.
Education: worse.’
‘But how do schools help matters?’
‘They give the peasant fresh wants.’
‘Well, that’s a thing I’ve never understood,’ Levin
replied with heat. ‘In what way are schools going to help
the people to improve their material position? You say
schools, education, will give them fresh wants. So much
the worse, since they won’t be capable of satisfying them.
And in what way a knowledge of addition and subtraction
and the catechism is going to improve their material
condition, I never could make out. The day before
yesterday, I met a peasant woman in the evening with a
little baby, and asked her where she was going. She said
she was going to the wise woman; her boy had screaming
Anna Karenina
739 of 1759
fits, so she was taking him to be doctored. I asked, ‘Why,
how does the wise woman cure screaming fits?’ ‘She puts
the child on the hen-roost and repeats some charm....’ ‘
‘Well, you’re saying it yourself! What’s wanted to
prevent her taking her child to the hen-roost to cure it of
screaming fits is just...’ Sviazhsky said, smiling goodhumoredly.
‘Oh, no!’ said Levin with annoyance; ‘that method of
doctoring I merely meant as a simile for doctoring the
people with schools. The people are poor and ignorant—
that we see as surely as the peasant woman sees the baby is
ill because it screams. But in what way this trouble of
poverty and ignorance is to be cured by schools is as
incomprehensible as how the hen-roost affects the
screaming. What has to be cured is what makes him poor.’
‘Well, in that, at least, you’re in agreement with
Spencer, whom you dislike so much. He says, too, that
education may be the consequence of greater prosperity
and comfort, of more frequent washing, as he says, but not
of being able to read and write..’
‘Well, then, I’m very glad—or the contrary, very sorry,
that I’m in agreement with Spencer; only I’ve known it a
long while. Schools can do no good; what will do good is
an economic organization in which the people will
Anna Karenina
740 of 1759
become richer, will have more leisure—and then there
will be schools.’
‘Still, all over Europe now schools are obligatory.’
‘And how far do you agree with Spencer yourself about
it?’ asked Levin.
But there was a gleam of alarm in Sviazhsky’s eyes, and
he said smiling:
‘No; that screaming story is positively capital! Did you
really hear it yourself?’
Levin saw that he was not to discover the connection
between this man’s life and his thoughts. Obviously he did
not care in the least what his reasoning led him to; all he
wanted was the process of reasoning. And he did not like
it when the process of reasoning brought him into a blind
alley. That was the only thing he disliked, and avoided by
changing the conversation to something agreeable and
amusing.
All the impressions of the day, beginning with the
impression made by the old peasant, which served, as it
were, as the fundamental basis of all the conceptions and
ideas of the day, threw Levin into violent excitement. This
dear good Sviazhsky, keeping a stock of ideas simply for
social purposes, and obviously having some other
principles hidden from Levin, while with the crowd,
Anna Karenina
741 of 1759
whose name is legion, he guided public opinion by ideas
he did not share; that irascible country gentleman,
perfectly correct in the conclusions that he had been
worried into by life, but wrong in his exasperation against
a whole class, and that the best class in Russia; his own
dissatisfaction with the work he had been doing, and the
vague hope of finding a remedy for all this—all was
blended in a sense of inward turmoil, and anticipation of
some solution near at hand.
Left alone in the room assigned him, lying on a spring
mattress that yielded unexpectedly at every movement of
his arm or his leg, Levin did not fall asleep for a long
while. Not one conversation with Sviazhsky, though he
had said a great deal that was clever, had interested Levin;
but the conclusions of the irascible landowner required
consideration. Levin could not help recalling every word
he had said, and in imagination amending his own replies.
‘Yes, I ought to have said to him: You say that our
husbandry does not answer because the peasant hates
improvements, and that they must be forced on him by
authority. If no system of husbandry answered at all
without these improvements, you would be quite right.
But the only system that does answer is where laborer is
working in accordance with his habits, just as on the old
Anna Karenina
742 of 1759
peasant’s land half-way here. Your and our general
dissatisfaction with the system shows that either we are to
blame or the laborers. We have gone our way—the
European way—a long while, without asking ourselves
about the qualities of our labor force. Let us try to look
upon the labor force not as an abstract force, but as the
Russian peasant with his instincts, and we shall arrange our
system of culture in accordance with that. Imagine, I
ought to have said to him, that you have the same system
as the old peasant has, that you have found means of
making your laborers take an interest in the success of the
work, and have found the happy mean in the way of
improvements which they will admit, and you will,
without exhausting the soil, get twice or three times the
yield you got before. Divide it in halves, give half as the
share of labor, the surplus left you will be greater, and the
share of labor will be greater too. And to do this one must
lower the standard of husbandry and interest the laborers
in its success. How to do this?—that’s a matter of detail;
but undoubtedly it can be done.’
This idea threw Levin into a great excitement. He did
not sleep half the night, thinking over in detail the putting
of his idea into practice. He had not intended to go away
next day, but he now determined to go home early in the
Anna Karenina
743 of 1759
morning. Besides, the sister-in-law with her low-necked
bodice aroused in him a feeling akin to shame and remorse
for some utterly base action. Most important of all—he
must get back without delay: he would have to make haste
to put his new project to the peasants before the sowing of
the winter wheat, so that the sowing might be undertaken
on a new basis. He had made up his mind to revolutionize
his whole system.
Anna Karenina
744 of 1759
Chapter 29
The carrying out of Levin’s plan presented many
difficulties; but he struggled on, doing his utmost, and
attained a result which, though not what he desired, was
enough to enable him, without self-deception, to believe
that the attempt was worth the trouble. One of the chief
difficulties was that the process of cultivating the land was
in full swing, that it was impossible to stop everything and
begin it all again from the beginning, and the machine had
to be mended while in motion.
When on the evening that he arrived home he
informed the bailiff of his plans, the latter with visible
pleasure agreed with what he said so long as he was
pointing out that all that had been done up to that time
was stupid and useless. The bailiff said that he had said so a
long while ago, but no heed had been paid him. But as for
the proposal made by Levin—to take a part as shareholder
with his laborers in each agricultural undertaking— at this
the bailiff simply expressed a profound despondency, and
offered no definite opinion, but began immediately talking
of the urgent necessity of carrying the remaining sheaves
of rye the next day, and of sending the men out for the
Anna Karenina
745 of 1759
second ploughing, so that Levin felt that this was not the
time for discussing it.
On beginning to talk to the peasants about it, and
making a proposition to cede them the land on new terms,
he came into collision with the same great difficulty that
they were so much absorbed by the current work of the
day, that they had not time to consider the advantages and
disadvantages of the proposed scheme.
The simple-hearted Ivan, the cowherd, seemed
completely to grasp Levin’s proposal—that he should with
his family take a share of the profits of the cattle-yard—
and he was in complete sympathy with the plan. But
when Levin hinted at the future advantages, Ivan’s face
expressed alarm and regret that he could not hear all he
had to say, and he made haste to find himself some task
that would admit of no delay: he either snatched up the
fork to pitch the hay out of the pens, or ran to get water
or to clear out the dung.
Another difficulty lay in the invincible disbelief of the
peasant that a landowner’s object could be anything else
than a desire to squeeze all he could out of them. They
were firmly convinced that his real aim (whatever he
might say to them) would always be in what he did not
say to them. And they themselves, in giving their opinion,
Anna Karenina
746 of 1759
said a great deal but never said what was their real object.
Moreover (Levin felt that the irascible landowner had
been right) the peasants made their first and unalterable
condition of any agreement whatever that they should not
be forced to any new methods of tillage of any kind, nor
to use new implements. They agreed that the modern
plough ploughed better, that the scarifier did the work
more quickly, but they found thousands of reasons that
made it out of the question for them to use either of them;
and though he had accepted the conviction that he would
have to lower the standard of cultivation, he felt sorry to
give up improved methods, the advantages of which were
so obvious. But in spite of all these difficulties he got his
way, and by autumn the system was working, or at least so
it seemed to him.
At first Levin had thought of giving up the whole
farming of the land just as it was to the peasants, the
laborers, and the bailiff on new conditions of partnership;
but he was very soon convinced that this was impossible,
and determined to divide it up. The cattle-yard, the
garden, hay fields, and arable land, divided into several
parts, had to be made into separate lots. The simplehearted cowherd, Ivan, who, Levin fancied, understood
the matter better than any of them, collecting together a
Anna Karenina
747 of 1759
gang of workers to help him, principally of his own
family, became a partner in the cattle-yard. A distant part
of the estate, a tract of waste land that had lain fallow for
eight years, was with the help of the clever carpenter,
Fyodor Ryezunov, taken by six families of peasants on
new conditions of partnership, and the peasant Shuraev
took the management of all the vegetable gardens on the
same terms. The remainder of the land was still worked on
the old system, but these three associated partnerships were
the first step to a new organization of the whole, and they
completely took up Levin’s time.
It is true that in the cattle-yard things went no better
than before, and Ivan strenuously opposed warm housing
for the cows and butter made of fresh cream, affirming
that cows require less food if kept cold, and that butter is
more profitable made from sour cream, and he asked for
wages just as under the old system, and took not the
slightest interest in the fact that the money he received was
not wages but an advance out of his future share in the
profits.
It is true that Fyodor Ryezunov’s company did not
plough over the ground twice before sowing, as had been
agreed, justifying themselves on the plea that the time was
too short. It is true that the peasants of the same company,
Anna Karenina
748 of 1759
though they had agreed to work the land on new
conditions, always spoke of the land, not as held in
partnership, but as rented for half the crop, and more than
once the peasants and Ryezunov himself said to Levin, ‘If
you would take a rent for the land, it would save you
trouble, and we should be more free.’ Moreover the same
peasants kept putting off, on various excuses, the building
of a cattleyard and barn on the land as agreed upon, and
delayed doing it till the winter.
It is true that Shuraev would have liked to let out the
kitchen gardens he had undertaken in small lots to the
peasants. He evidently quite misunderstood, and
apparently intentionally misunderstood, the conditions
upon which the land had been given to him.
Often, too, talking to the peasants and explaining to
them all the advantages of the plan, Levin felt that the
peasants heard nothing but the sound of his voice, and
were firmly resolved, whatever he might say, not to let
themselves be taken in. He felt this especially when he
talked to the cleverest of the peasants, Ryezunov, and
detected the gleam in Ryezunov’s eyes which showed so
plainly both ironical amusement at Levin, and the firm
conviction that, if any one were to be taken in, it would
not be he, Ryezunov. But in spite of all this Levin
Anna Karenina
749 of 1759
thought the system worked, and that by keeping accounts
strictly and insisting on his own way, he would prove to
them in the future the advantages of the arrangement, and
then the system would go of itself.
These matters, together with the management of the
land still left on his hands, and the indoor work over his
book, so engrossed Levin the whole summer that he
scarcely ever went out shooting. At the end of August he
heard that the Oblonskys had gone away to Moscow,
from their servant who brought back the side-saddle. He
felt that in not answering Darya Alexandrovna’s letter he
had by his rudeness, of which he could not think without
a flush of shame, burned his ships, and that he would
never go and see them again. He had been just as rude
with the Sviazhskys, leaving them without saying goodbye. But he would never go to see them again either. He
did not care about that now. The business of reorganizing
the farming of his land absorbed him as completely as
though there would never be anything else in his life. He
read the books lent him by Sviazhsky, and copying out
what he had not got, he read both the economic and
socialistic books on the subject, but, as he had anticipated,
found nothing bearing on the scheme he had undertaken.
In the books on political economy—in Mill, for instance,
Anna Karenina
750 of 1759
whom he studied first with great ardor, hoping every
minute to find an answer to the questions that were
engrossing him—he found laws deduced from the
condition of land culture in Europe; but he did not see
why these laws, which did not apply in Russia, must be
general. He saw just the same thing in the socialistic
books: either they were the beautiful but impracticable
fantasies which had fascinated him when he was a student,
or they were attempts at improving, rectifying the
economic position in which Europe was placed, with
which the system of land tenure in Russia had nothing in
common. Political economy told him that the laws by
which the wealth of Europe had been developed, and was
developing, were universal and unvarying. Socialism told
him that development along these lines leads to ruin. And
neither of them gave an answer, or even a hint, in reply to
the question what he, Levin, and all the Russian peasants
and landowners, were to do with their millions of hands
and millions of acres, to make them as productive as
possible for the common weal.
Having once taken the subject up, he read
conscientiously everything bearing on it, and intended in
the autumn to go abroad to study land systems on the
spot, in order that he might not on this question be
Anna Karenina
751 of 1759
confronted with what so often met him on various
subjects. Often, just as he was beginning to understand the
idea in the mind of anyone he was talking to, and was
beginning to explain his own, he would suddenly be told:
‘But Kauffmann, but Jones, but Dubois, but Michelli? You
haven’t read them: they’ve thrashed that question out
thoroughly.’
He saw now distinctly that Kauffmann and Michelli
had nothing to tell him. He knew what he wanted. He
saw that Russia has splendid land, splendid laborers, and
that in certain cases, as at the peasant’s on the way to
Sviazhsky’s, the produce raised by the laborers and the
land is great—in the majority of cases when capital is
applied in the European way the produce is small, and that
this simply arises from the fact that the laborers want to
work and work well only in their own peculiar way, and
that this antagonism is not incidental but invariable, and
has its roots in the national spirit. He thought that the
Russian people whose task it was to colonize and cultivate
vast tracts of unoccupied land, consciously adhered, till all
their land was occupied, to the methods suitable to their
purpose, and that their methods were by no means so bad
as was generally supposed. And he wanted to prove this
theoretically in his book and practically on his land.
Anna Karenina
752 of 1759
Chapter 30
At the end of September the timber had been carted for
building the cattleyard on the land that had been allotted
to the association of peasants, and the butter from the
cows was sold and the profits divided. In practice the
system worked capitally, or, at least, so it seemed to Levin.
In order to work out the whole subject theoretically and
to complete his book, which, in Levin’s daydreams, was
not merely to effect a revolution in political economy, but
to annihilate that science entirely and to lay the foundation
of a new science of the relation of the people to the soil,
all that was left to do was to make a tour abroad, and to
study on the spot all that had been done in the same
direction, and to collect conclusive evidence that all that
had been done there was not what was wanted. Levin was
only waiting for the delivery of his wheat to receive the
money for it and go abroad. But the rains began,
preventing the harvesting of the corn and potatoes left in
the fields, and putting a stop to all work, even to the
delivery of the wheat.
The mud was impassable along the roads; two mills
were carried away, and the weather got worse and worse.
Anna Karenina
753 of 1759
On the 30th of September the sun came out in the
morning, and hoping for fine weather, Levin began
making final preparations for his journey. He gave orders
for the wheat to be delivered, sent the bailiff to the
merchant to get the money owing him, and went out
himself to give some final directions on the estate before
setting off.
Having finished all his business, soaked through with
the streams of water which kept running down the leather
behind his neck and his gaiters, but in the keenest and
most confident temper, Levin returned homewards in the
evening. The weather had become worse than ever
towards evening; the hail lashed the drenched mare so
cruelly that she went along sideways, shaking her head and
ears; but Levin was all right under his hood, and he looked
cheerfully about him at the muddy streams running under
the wheels, at the drops hanging on every bare twig, at the
whiteness of the patch of unmelted hailstones on the
planks of the bridge, at the thick layer of still juicy, fleshy
leaves that lay heaped up about the stripped elm-tree. In
spite of the gloominess of nature around him, he felt
peculiarly eager. The talks he had been having with the
peasants in the further village had shown that they were
beginning to get used to their new position. The old
Anna Karenina
754 of 1759
servant to whose hut he had gone to get dry evidently
approved of Levin’s plan, and of his own accord proposed
to enter the partnership by the purchase of cattle.
‘I have only to go stubbornly on towards my aim, and I
shall attain my end,’ thought Levin; ‘and it’s something to
work and take trouble for. This is not a matter of myself
individually; the question of the public welfare comes into
it. The whole system of culture, the chief element in the
condition of the people, must be completely transformed.
Instead of poverty, general prosperity and content; instead
of hostility, harmony and unity of interests. In short, a
bloodless revolution, but a revolution of the greatest
magnitude, beginning in the little circle of our district,
then the province, then Russia, the whole world. Because
a just idea cannot but be fruitful. Yes, it’s an aim worth
working for. And it’s being me, Kostya Levin, who went
to a ball in a black tie, and was refused by the
Shtcherbatskaya girl, and who was intrinsically such a
pitiful, worthless creature—that proves nothing; I feel sure
Franklin felt just as worthless, and he too had no faith in
himself, thinking of himself as a whole. That means
nothing. And he too, most likely, had an Agafea
Mihalovna to whom he confided his secrets.’
Anna Karenina
755 of 1759
Musing on such thoughts Levin reached home in the
darkness.
The bailiff, who had been to the merchant, had come
back and brought part of the money for the wheat. An
agreement had been made with the old servant, and on the
road the bailiff had learned that everywhere the corn was
still standing in the fields, so that his one hundred and
sixty shocks that had not been carried were nothing in
comparison with the losses of others.
After dinner Levin was sitting, as he usually did, in an
easy chair with a book, and as he read he went on
thinking of the journey before him in connection with his
book. Today all the significance of his book rose before
him with special distinctness, and whole periods ranged
themselves in his mind in illustration of his theories. ‘I
must write that down,’ he thought. ‘That ought to form a
brief introduction, which I thought unnecessary before.’
He got up to go to his writing table, and Laska, lying at his
feet, got up too, stretching and looking at him as though
to inquire where to go. But he had not time to write it
down, for the head peasants had come round, and Levin
went out into the hall to them.
After his levee, that is to say, giving directions about
the labors of the next day, and seeing all the peasants who
Anna Karenina
756 of 1759
had business with him, Levin went back to his study and
sat down to work.
Laska lay under the table; Agafea Mihalovna settled
herself in her place with her stocking.
After writing for a little while, Levin suddenly thought
with exceptional vividness of Kitty, her refusal, and their
last meeting. He got up and began walking about the
room.
‘What’s the use of being dreary?’ said Agafea
Mihalovna. ‘Come, why do you stay on at home? You
ought to go to some warm springs, especially now you’re
ready for the journey.’
‘Well, I am going away the day after tomorrow, Agafea
Mihalovna; I must finish my work.’
‘There, there, your work, you say! As if you hadn’t
done enough for the peasants! Why, as ‘tis, they’re saying,
‘Your master will be getting some honor from the Tsar for
it.’ Indeed and it is a strange thing; why need you worry
about the peasants?’
‘I’m not worrying about them; I’m doing it for my
own good.’
Agafea Mihalovna knew every detail of Levin’s plans
for his land. Levin often put his views before her in all
their complexity, and not uncommonly he argued with
Anna Karenina
757 of 1759
her and did not agree with her comments. But on this
occasion she entirely misinterpreted what he had said.
‘Of one’s soul’s salvation we all know and must think
before all else,’ she said with a sigh. ‘Parfen Denisitch
now, for all he was no scholar, he died a death that God
grant every one of us the like,’ she said, referring to a
servant who had died recently. ‘Took the sacrament and
all.’
‘That’s not what I mean,’ said he. ‘I mean that I’m
acting for my own advantage. It’s all the better for me if
the peasants do their work better.’
‘Well, whatever you do, if he’s a lazy good-for-nought,
everything’ll be at sixes and sevens. If he has a conscience,
he’ll work, and if not, there’s no doing anything.’
‘Oh, come, you say yourself Ivan has begun looking
after the cattle better.’
‘All I say is,’ answered Agafea Mihalovna, evidently not
speaking at random, but in strict sequence of idea, ‘that
you ought to get married, that’s what I say.’
Agafea Mihalovna’s allusion to the very subject he had
only just been thinking about, hurt and stung him. Levin
scowled, and without answering her, he sat down again to
his work, repeating to himself all that he had been
thinking of the real significance of that work. Only at
Anna Karenina
758 of 1759
intervals he listened in the stillness to the click of Agafea
Mihalovna’s needles, and recollecting what he did not
want to remember, he frowned again.
At nine o’clock they heard the bell and the faint
vibration of a carriage over the mud.
‘Well, here’s visitors come to us, and you won’t be
dull,’ said Agafea Mihalovna, getting up and going to the
door. But Levin overtook her. His work was not going
well now, and he was glad of a visitor, whoever it might
be.
Anna Karenina
759 of 1759
Chapter 31
Running halfway down the staircase, Levin caught a
sound he knew, a familiar cough in the hall. But he heard
it indistinctly through the sound of his own footsteps, and
hoped he was mistaken. Then he caught sight of a long,
bony, familiar figure, and now it seemed there was no
possibility of mistake; and yet he still went on hoping that
this tall man taking off his fur cloak and coughing was not
his brother Nikolay.
Levin loved his brother, but being with him was always
a torture. Just now, when Levin, under the influence of
the thoughts that had come to him, and Agafea
Mihalovna’s hint, was in a troubled and uncertain humor,
the meeting with his brother that he had to face seemed
particularly difficult. Instead of a lively, healthy visitor,
some outsider who would, he hoped, cheer him up in his
uncertain humor, he had to see his brother, who knew
him through and through, who would call forth all the
thoughts nearest his heart, would force him to show
himself fully. And that he was not disposed to do.
Angry with himself for so base a feeling, Levin ran into
the hall; as soon as he had seen his brother close, this
Anna Karenina
760 of 1759
feeling of selfish disappointment vanished instantly and was
replaced by pity. Terrible as his brother Nikolay had been
before in his emaciation and sickliness, now he looked still
more emaciated, still more wasted. He was a skeleton
covered with skin.
He stood in the hall, jerking his long thin neck, and
pulling the scarf off it, and smiled a strange and pitiful
smile. When he saw that smile, submissive and humble,
Levin felt something clutching at his throat.
‘You see, I’ve come to you,’ said Nikolay in a thick
voice, never for one second taking his eyes off his
brother’s face. ‘I’ve been meaning to a long while, but I’ve
been unwell all the time. Now I’m ever so much better,’
he said, rubbing his beard with his big thin hands.
‘Yes, yes!’ answered Levin. And he felt still more
frightened when, kissing him, he felt with his lips the
dryness of his brother’s skin and saw close to him his big
eyes, full of a strange light.
A few weeks before, Konstantin Levin had written to
his brother that through the sale of the small part of the
property, that had remained undivided, there was a sum of
about two thousand roubles to come to him as his share.
Nikolay said that he had come now to take this money
and, what was more important, to stay a while in the old
Anna Karenina
761 of 1759
nest, to get in touch with the earth, so as to renew his
strength like the heroes of old for the work that lay before
him. In spite of his exaggerated stoop, and the emaciation
that was so striking from his height, his movements were
as rapid and abrupt as ever. Levin led him into his study.
His brother dressed with particular care—a thing he
never used to do—combed his scanty, lank hair, and,
smiling, went upstairs.
He was in the most affectionate and good-humored
mood, just as Levin often remembered him in childhood.
He even referred to Sergey Ivanovitch without rancor.
When he saw Agafea Mihalovna, he made jokes with her
and asked after the old servants. The news of the death of
Parfen Denisitch made a painful impression on him. A
look of fear crossed his face, but he regained his serenity
immediately.
‘Of course he was quite old,’ he said, and changed the
subject. ‘Well, I’ll spend a month or two with you, and
then I’m off to Moscow. Do you know, Myakov has
promised me a place there, and I’m going into the service.
Now I’m going to arrange my life quite differently,’ he
went on. ‘You know I got rid of that woman.’
‘Marya Nikolaevna? Why, what for?’
Anna Karenina
762 of 1759
‘Oh, she was a horrid woman! She caused me all sorts
of worries.’ But he did not say what the annoyances were.
He could not say that he had cast off Marya Nikolaevna
because the tea was weak, and, above all, because she
would look after him, as though he were an invalid.
‘Besides, I want to turn over a new leaf completely
now. I’ve done silly things, of course, like everyone else,
but money’s the last consideration; I don’t regret it. So
long as there’s health, and my health, thank God, is quite
restored.’
Levin listened and racked his brains, but could think of
nothing to say. Nikolay probably felt the same; he began
questioning his brother about his affairs; and Levin was
glad to talk about himself, because then he could speak
without hypocrisy. He told his brother of his plans and his
doings.
His brother listened, but evidently he was not
interested by it.
These two men were so akin, so near each other, that
the slightest gesture, the tone of voice, told both more
than could be said in words.
Both of them now had only one thought—the illness
of Nikolay and the nearness of his death—which stifled all
else. But neither of them dared to speak of it, and so
Anna Karenina
763 of 1759
whatever they said— not uttering the one thought that
filled their minds—was all falsehood. Never had Levin
been so glad when the evening was over and it was time
to go to bed. Never with any outside person, never on
any official visit had he been so unnatural and false as he
was that evening. And the consciousness of this
unnaturalness, and the remorse he felt at it, made him
even more unnatural. He wanted to weep over his dying,
dearly loved brother, and he had to listen and keep on
talking of how he meant to live.
As the house was damp, and only one bedroom had
been kept heated, Levin put his brother to sleep in his
own bedroom behind a screen.
His brother got into bed, and whether he slept or did
not sleep, tossed about like a sick man, coughed, and
when he could not get his throat clear, mumbled
something. Sometimes when his breathing was painful, he
said, ‘Oh, my God!’ Sometimes when he was choking he
muttered angrily, ‘Ah, the devil!’ Levin could not sleep for
a long while, hearing him. His thoughts were of the most
various, but the end of all his thoughts was the same—
death. Death, the inevitable end of all, for the first time
presented itself to him with irresistible force. And death,
which was here in this loved brother, groaning half asleep
Anna Karenina
764 of 1759
and from habit calling without distinction on God and the
devil, was not so remote as it had hitherto seemed to him.
It was in himself too, he felt that. If not today, tomorrow,
if not tomorrow, in thirty years, wasn’t it all the same!
And what was this inevitable death—he did not know,
had never thought about it, and what was more, had not
the power, had not the courage to think about it.
‘I work, I want to do something, but I had forgotten it
must all end; I had forgotten—death.’
He sat on his bed in the darkness, crouched up,
hugging his knees, and holding his breath from the strain
of thought, he pondered. But the more intensely he
thought, the clearer it became to him that it was
indubitably so, that in reality, looking upon life, he had
forgotten one little fact—that death will come, and all
ends; that nothing was even worth beginning, and that
there was no helping it anyway. Yes, it was awful, but it
was so.
‘But I am alive still. Now what’s to be done? what’s to
be done?’ he said in despair. He lighted a candle, got up
cautiously and went to the looking-glass, and began
looking at his face and hair. Yes, there were gray hairs
about his temples. He opened his mouth. His back teeth
were beginning to decay. He bared his muscular arms.
Anna Karenina
765 of 1759
Yes, there was strength in them. But Nikolay, who lay
there breathing with what was left of lungs, had had a
strong, healthy body too. And suddenly he recalled how
they used to go to bed together as children, and how they
only waited till Fyodor Bogdanitch was out of the room
to fling pillows at each other and laugh, laugh irrepressibly,
so that even their awe of Fyodor Bogdanitch could not
check the effervescing, overbrimming sense of life and
happiness. ‘And now that bent, hollow chest...and I, not
knowing what will become of me, or wherefore..’
‘K...ha! K...ha! Damnation! Why do you keep
fidgeting, why don’t you go to sleep?’ his brother’s voice
called to him.
‘Oh, I don’t know, I’m not sleepy.’
‘I have had a good sleep, I’m not in a sweat now. Just
see, feel my shirt; it’s all wet, isn’t it?’
Levin felt, withdrew behind the screen, and put out the
candle, but for a long while he could not sleep. The
question how to live had hardly begun to grow a little
clearer to him, when a new, insoluble question presented
itself—death.
‘Why, he’s dying—yes, he’ll die in the spring, and how
help him? What can I say to him? What do I know about
it? I’d even forgotten that it was at all.’
Anna Karenina
766 of 1759
Chapter 32
Levin had long before made the observation that when
one is uncomfortable with people from their being
excessively amenable and meek, One is apt very soon after
to find things intolerable from their touchiness and
irritability. He felt that this was how it would be with his
brother. And his brother Nikolay’s gentleness did in fact
not last out for long. The very next morning he began to
be irritable, and seemed doing his best to find fault with
his brother, attacking him on his tenderest points.
Levin felt himself to blame, and could not set things
right. He felt that if they had both not kept up
appearances, but had spoken, as it is called, from the
heart—that is to say, had said only just what they were
thinking and feeling—they would simply have looked into
each other’s faces, and Konstantin could only have said,
‘You’re dying, you’re dying,’ and Nikolay could only
have answered, ‘I know I’m dying, but I’m afraid, I’m
afraid, I’m afraid!’ And they could have said nothing more,
if they had said only what was in their hearts. But life like
that was impossible, and so Konstantin tried to do what he
had been trying to do all his life, and never could learn to
Anna Karenina
767 of 1759
do, though, as far as he could observe, many people knew
so well how to do it, and without it there was no living at
all. He tried to say what he was not thinking, but he felt
continually that it had a ring of falsehood, that his brother
detected him in it, and was exasperated at it.
The third day Nikolay induced his brother to explain
his plan to him again, and began not merely attacking it,
but intentionally confounding it with communism.
‘You’ve simply borrowed an idea that’s not your own,
but you’ve distorted it, and are trying to apply it where it’s
not applicable.’
‘But I tell you it’s nothing to do with it. They deny the
justice of property, of capital, of inheritance, while I do
not deny this chief stimulus.’ (Levin felt disgusted himself
at using such expressions, but ever since he had been
engrossed by his work, he had unconsciously come more
and more frequently to use words not Russian.) ‘All I
want is to regulate labor.’
‘Which means, you’ve borrowed an idea, stripped it of
all that gave it its force, and want to make believe that it’s
something new,’ said Nikolay, angrily tugging at his
necktie.
‘But my idea has nothing in common..’
Anna Karenina
768 of 1759
‘That, anyway,’ said Nikolay Levin, with an ironical
smile, his eyes flashing malignantly, ‘has the charm of—
what’s one to call it?—geometrical symmetry, of clearness,
of definiteness. It may be a Utopia. But if once one allows
the possibility of making of all the past a tabula rasa—no
property, no family— then labor would organize itself.
But you gain nothing..’
‘Why do you mix things up? I’ve never been a
communist.’
‘But I have, and I consider it’s premature, but rational,
and it has a future, just like Christianity in its first ages.’
‘All that I maintain is that the labor force ought to be
investigated from the point of view of natural science; that
is to say, it ought to be studied, its qualities ascertained..’
‘But that’s utter waste of time. That force finds a
certain form of activity of itself, according to the stage of
its development. There have been slaves first everywhere,
then metayers; and we have the half-crop system, rent, and
day laborers. What are you trying to find?’
Levin suddenly lost his temper at these words, because
at the bottom of his heart he was afraid that it was true—
true that he was trying to hold the balance even between
communism and the familiar forms, and that this was
hardly possible.
Anna Karenina
769 of 1759
‘I am trying to find means of working productively for
myself and for the laborers. I want to organize...’ he
answered hotly.
‘You don’t want to organize anything; it’s simply just as
you’ve been all your life, that you want to be original to
pose as not exploiting the peasants simply, but with some
idea in view.’
‘Oh, all right, that’s what you think—and let me
alone!’ answered Levin, feeling the muscles of his left
cheek twitching uncontrollably.
‘You’ve never had, and never have, convictions; all you
want is to please your vanity.’
‘Oh, very well; then let me alone!’
‘And I will let you alone! and it’s high time I did, and
go to the devil with you! and I’m very sorry I ever came!’
In spite of all Levin’s efforts to soothe his brother
afterwards, Nikolay would listen to nothing he said,
declaring that it was better to part, and Konstantin saw
that it simply was that life was unbearable to him.
Nikolay was just getting ready to go, when Konstantin
went in to him again and begged him, rather unnaturally,
to forgive him if he had hurt his feelings in any way.
Anna Karenina
770 of 1759
‘Ah, generosity!’ said Nikolay, and he smiled. ‘If you
want to be right, I can give you that satisfaction. You’re in
the right;
but I’m going all the same.’
It was only just at parting that Nikolay kissed him, and
said, looking with sudden strangeness and seriousness at his
brother:
‘Anyway, don’t remember evil against me, Kostya!’ and
his voice quivered. These were the only words that had
been spoken sincerely between them. Levin knew that
those words meant, ‘You see, and you know, that I’m in a
bad way, and maybe we shall not see each other again.’
Levin knew this, and the tears gushed from his eyes. He
kissed his brother once more, but he could not speak, and
knew not what to say.
Three days after his brother’s departure, Levin too set
off for his foreign tour. Happening to meet Shtcherbatsky,
Kitty’s cousin, in the railway train, Levin greatly
astonished him by his depression.
‘What’s the matter with you?’ Shtcherbatsky asked him.
‘Oh, nothing; there’s not much happiness in life.’
‘Not much? You come with me to Paris instead of to
Mulhausen. You shall see how to be happy.’
‘No, I’ve done with it all. It’s time I was dead.’
Anna Karenina
771 of 1759
‘Well, that’s a good one!’ said Shtcherbatsky, laughing;
‘why, I’m only just getting ready to begin.’
‘Yes, I thought the same not long ago, but now I know
I shall soon be dead.’
Levin said what he had genuinely been thinking of late.
He saw nothing but death or the advance towards death in
everything. But his cherished scheme only engrossed him
the more. Life had to be got through somehow till death
did come. Darkness had fallen upon everything for him;
but just because of this darkness he felt that the one
guiding clue in the darkness was his work, and he clutched
it and clung to it with all his strength.
Anna Karenina
772 of 1759
PART FOUR
Anna Karenina
773 of 1759
Chapter 1
The Karenins, husband and wife, continued living in
the same house, met every day, but were complete
strangers to one another. Alexey Alexandrovitch made it a
rule to see his wife every day, so that the servants might
have no grounds for suppositions, but avoided dining at
home. Vronsky was never at Alexey Alexandrovitch’s
house, but Anna saw him away from home, and her
husband was aware of it.
The position was one of misery for all three; and not
one of them would have been equal to enduring this
position for a single day, if it had not been for the
expectation that it would change, that it was merely a
temporary painful ordeal which would pass over. Alexey
Alexandrovitch hoped that this passion would pass, as
everything does pass, that everyone would forget about it,
and his name would remain unsullied. Anna, on whom
the position depended, and for whom it was more
miserable than for anyone, endured it because she not
merely hoped, but firmly believed, that it would all very
soon be settled and come right. She had not the least idea
what would settle the position, but she firmly believed that
something would very soon turn up now. Vronsky,
Anna Karenina
774 of 1759
against his own will or wishes, followed her lead, hoped
too that something, apart from his own action, would be
sure to solve all difficulties.
In the middle of the winter Vronsky spent a very
tiresome week. A foreign prince, who had come on a visit
to Petersburg, was put under his charge, and he had to
show him the sights worth seeing. Vronsky was of
distinguished appearance; he possessed, moreover, the art
of behaving with respectful dignity, and was used to
having to do with such grand personages—that was how
he came to be put in charge of the prince. But he felt his
duties very irksome. The prince was anxious to miss
nothing of which he would be asked at home, had he seen
that in Russia? And on his own account he was anxious to
enjoy to the utmost all Russian forms of amusement.
Vronsky was obliged to be his guide in satisfying both
these inclinations. The mornings they spent driving to
look at places of interest; the evenings they passed
enjoying the national entertainments. The prince rejoiced
in health exceptional even among princes. By gymnastics
and careful attention to his health he had brought himself
to such a point that in spite of his excess in pleasure he
looked as fresh as a big glossy green Dutch cucumber. The
prince had traveled a great deal, and considered one of the
Anna Karenina
775 of 1759
chief advantages of modern facilities of communication
was the accessibility of the pleasures of all nations.
He had been in Spain, and there had indulged in
serenades and had made friends with a Spanish girl who
played the mandolin. In Switzerland he had killed
chamois. In England he had galloped in a red coat over
hedges and killed two hundred pheasants for a bet. In
Turkey he had got into a harem; in India he had hunted
on an elephant, and now in Russia he wished to taste all
the specially Russian forms of pleasure.
Vronsky, who was, as it were, chief master of the
ceremonies to him, was at great pains to arrange all the
Russian amusements suggested by various persons to the
prince. They had race horses, and Russian pancakes and
bear hunts and three-horse sledges, and gypsies and
drinking feasts, with the Russian accompaniment of
broken crockery. And the prince with surprising ease fell
in with the Russian spirit, smashed trays full of crockery,
sat with a gypsy girl on his knee, and seemed to be
asking—what more, and does the whole Russian spirit
consist in just this?
In reality, of all the Russian entertainments the prince
liked best French actresses and ballet dancers and whiteseal champagne. Vronsky was used to princes, but, either
Anna Karenina
776 of 1759
because he had himself changed of late, or that he was in
too close proximity to the prince, that week seemed
fearfully wearisome to him. The whole of that week he
experienced a sensation such as a man might have set in
charge of a dangerous madman, afraid of the madman, and
at the same time, from being with him, fearing for his own
reason. Vronsky was continually conscious of the necessity
of never for a second relaxing the tone of stern official
respectfulness, that he might not himself be insulted. The
prince’s manner of treating the very people who, to
Vronsky’s surprise, were ready to descend to any depths to
provide him with Russian amusements, was
contemptuous. His criticisms of Russian women, whom
he wished to study, more than once made Vronsky
crimson with indignation. The chief reason why the
prince was so particularly disagreeable to Vronsky was that
he could not help seeing himself in him. And what he saw
in this mirror did not gratify his self-esteem. He was a very
stupid and very self-satisfied and very healthy and very
well-washed man, and nothing else. He was a
gentleman—that was true, and Vronsky could not deny it.
He was equable and not cringing with his superiors, was
free and ingratiating in his behavior with his equals, and
was contemptuously indulgent with his inferiors. Vronsky
Anna Karenina
777 of 1759
was himself the same, and regarded it as a great merit to be
so. But for this prince he was an inferior, and his
contemptuous and indulgent attitude to him revolted him.
‘Brainless beef! can I be like that?’ he thought.
Be that as it might, when, on the seventh day, he
parted from the
prince, who was starting for Moscow, and received his
thanks, he was happy to be rid of his uncomfortable
position and the unpleasant reflection of himself. He said
good-bye to him at the station on their return from a bear
hunt, at which they had had a display of Russian prowess
kept up all night.
Anna Karenina
778 of 1759
Chapter 2
When he got home, Vronsky found there a note from
Anna. She wrote, ‘I am ill and unhappy. I cannot come
out, but I cannot go on longer without seeing you. Come
in this evening. Alexey Alexandrovitch goes to the council
at seven and will be there till ten.’ Thinking for an instant
of the strangeness of her bidding him come straight to her,
in spite of her husband’s insisting on her not receiving
him, he decided to go.
Vronsky had that winter got his promotion, was now a
colonel, had left the regimental quarters, and was living
alone. After having some lunch, he lay down on the sofa
immediately, and in five minutes memories of the hideous
scenes he had witnessed during the last few days were
confused together and joined on to a mental image of
Anna and of the peasant who had played an important part
in the bear hunt, and Vronsky fell asleep. He waked up in
the dark, trembling with horror, and made haste to light a
candle. ‘What was it? What? What was the dreadful thing
I dreamed? Yes, yes; I think a little dirty man with a
disheveled beard was stooping down doing something, and
all of a sudden he began saying some strange words in
Anna Karenina
779 of 1759
French. Yes, there was nothing else in the dream,’ he said
to himself. ‘But why was it so awful?’ He vividly recalled
the peasant again and those incomprehensible French
words the peasant had uttered, and a chill of horror ran
down his spine.
‘What nonsense!’ thought Vronsky, and glanced at his
watch.
It was half-past eight already. He rang up his servant,
dressed in haste, and went out onto the steps, completely
forgetting the dream and only worried at being late. As he
drove up to the Karenins’ entrance he looked at his watch
and saw it was ten minutes to nine. A high, narrow
carriage with a pair of grays was standing at the entrance.
He recognized Anna’s carriage. ‘She is coming to me,’
thought Vronsky, ‘and better she should. I don’t like
going into that house. But no matter; I can’t hide myself,’
he thought, and with that manner peculiar to him from
childhood, as of a man who has nothing to be ashamed of,
Vronsky got out of his sledge and went to the door. The
door opened, and the hall porter with a rug on his arm
called the carriage. Vronsky, though he did not usually
notice details, noticed at this moment the amazed
expression with which the porter glanced at him. In the
very doorway Vronsky almost ran up against Alexey
Anna Karenina
780 of 1759
Alexandrovitch. The gas jet threw its full light on the
bloodless, sunken face under the black hat and on the
white cravat, brilliant against the beaver of the coat.
Karenin’s fixed, dull eyes were fastened upon Vronsky’s
face. Vronsky bowed, and Alexey Alexandrovitch,
chewing his lips, lifted his hand to his hat and went on.
Vronsky saw him without looking round get into the
carriage, pick up the rug and the opera-glass at the
window and disappear. Vronsky went into the hall. His
brows were scowling, and his eyes gleamed with a proud
and angry light in them.
‘What a position!’ he thought. ‘If he would fight,
would stand up for his honor, I could act, could express
my feelings; but this weakness or baseness.... He puts me
in the position of playing false, which I never meant and
never mean to do.’
Vronsky’s ideas had changed since the day of his
conversation with Anna in the Vrede garden.
Unconsciously yielding to the weakness of Anna—who
had surrendered herself up to him utterly, and simply
looked to him to decide her fate, ready to submit to
anything—he had long ceased to think that their tie might
end as he had thought then. His ambitious plans had
retreated into the background again, and feeling that he
Anna Karenina
781 of 1759
had got out of that circle of activity in which everything
was definite, he had given himself entirely to his passion,
and that passion was binding him more and more closely
to her.
He was still in the hall when he caught the sound of
her retreating footsteps. He knew she had been expecting
him, had listened for him, and was now going back to the
drawing room.
‘No,’ she cried, on seeing him, and at the first sound of
her voice the tears came into her eyes. ‘No; if things are to
go on like this, the end will come much, much too soon.’
‘What is it, dear one?’
‘What? I’ve been waiting in agony for an hour, two
hours...No, I won’t...I can’t quarrel with you. Of course
you couldn’t come. No, I won’t.’ She laid her two hands
on his shoulders, and looked a long while at him with a
profound, passionate, and at the same time searching look.
She was studying his face to make up for the time she had
not seen him. She was, every time she saw him, making
the picture of him in her imagination (incomparably
superior, impossible in reality) fit with him as he really
was.
Anna Karenina
782 of 1759
Chapter 3
‘You met him?’ she asked, when they had sat down at
the table in the lamplight. ‘You’re punished, you see, for
being late.’
‘Yes; but how was it? Wasn’t he to be at the council?’
‘He had been and come back, and was going out
somewhere again. But that’s no matter. Don’t talk about
it. Where have you been? With the prince still?’
She knew every detail of his existence. He was going to
say that he had been up all night and had dropped asleep,
but looking at her thrilled and rapturous face, he was
ashamed. And he said he had had to go to report on the
prince’s departure.
‘But it’s over now? He is gone!’
‘Thank God it’s over! You wouldn’t believe how
insufferable it’s been for me.’
‘Why so? Isn’t it the life all of you, all young men,
always lead?’ she said, knitting her brows; and taking up
the crochet work that was lying on the table, she began
drawing the hook out of it, without looking at Vronsky.
‘I gave that life up long ago,’ said he, wondering at the
change in her face, and trying to divine its meaning. ‘And
Anna Karenina
783 of 1759
I confess,’ he said, with a smile, showing his thick, white
teeth, ‘this week I’ve been, as it were, looking at myself in
a glass, seeing that life, and I didn’t like it.’
She held the work in her hands, but did not crochet,
and looked at him with strange, shining, and hostile eyes.
‘This morning Liza came to see me—they’re not afraid
to call on me, in spite of the Countess Lidia Ivanovna,’ she
put in—‘and she told me about your Athenian evening.
How loathsome!’
‘I was just going to say..’
She interrupted him. ‘It was that Therese you used to
know?’
‘I was just saying..’
‘How disgusting you are, you men! How is it you can’t
understand that a woman can never forget that,’ she said,
getting more and more angry, and so letting him see the
cause of her irritation, ‘especially a woman who cannot
know your life? What do I know? What have I ever
known?’ she said; ‘what you tell me. And how do I know
whether you tell me the truth?..’
‘Anna, you hurt me. Don’t you trust me? Haven’t I
told you that I haven’t a thought I wouldn’t lay bare to
you?’
Anna Karenina
784 of 1759
‘Yes, yes,’ she said, evidently trying to suppress her
jealous thoughts. ‘But if only you knew how wretched I
am! I believe you, I believe you.... What were you
saying?’
But he could not at once recall what he had been going
to say. These fits of jealousy, which of late had been more
and more frequent with her, horrified him, and however
much he tried to disguise the fact, made him feel cold to
her, although he knew the cause of her jealousy was her
love for him. How often he had told himself that her love
was happiness; and now she loved him as a woman can
love when love has outweighed for her all the good things
of life—and he was much further from happiness than
when he had followed her from Moscow. Then he had
thought himself unhappy, but happiness was before him;
now he felt that the best happiness was already left behind.
She was utterly unlike what she had been when he first
saw her. Both morally and physically she had changed for
the worse. She had broadened out all over, and in her face
at the time when she was speaking of the actress there was
an evil expression of hatred that distorted it. He looked at
her as a man looks at a faded flower he has gathered, with
difficulty recognizing in it the beauty for which he picked
and ruined it. And in spite of this he felt that then, when
Anna Karenina
785 of 1759
his love was stronger, he could, if he had greatly wished it,
have torn that love out of his heart; but now, when as at
that moment it seemed to him he felt no love for her, he
knew that what bound him to her could not be broken.
‘Well, well, what was it you were going to say about
the prince? I have driven away the fiend,’ she added. The
fiend was the name they had given her jealousy. ‘What did
you begin to tell me about the prince? Why did you find
it so tiresome?’
‘Oh, it was intolerable!’ he said, trying to pick up the
thread of his interrupted thought. ‘He does not improve
on closer acquaintance. If you want him defined, here he
is: a prime, well-fed beast such as takes medals at the cattle
shows, and nothing more,’ he said, with a tone of vexation
that interested her.
‘No; how so?’ she replied. ‘He’s seen a great deal,
anyway; he’s cultured?’
‘It’s an utterly different culture—their culture. He’s
cultivated, one sees, simply to be able to despise culture, as
they despise everything but animal pleasures.’
‘But don’t you all care for these animal pleasures?’ she
said, and again he noticed a dark look in her eyes that
avoided him.
‘How is it you’re defending him?’ he said, smiling.
Anna Karenina
786 of 1759
‘I’m not defending him, it’s nothing to me; but I
imagine, if you had not cared for those pleasures yourself,
you might have got out of them. But if it affords you
satisfaction to gaze at Therese in the attire of Eve..’
‘Again, the devil again,’ Vronsky said, taking the hand
she had laid on the table and kissing it.
‘Yes; but I can’t help it. You don’t know what I have
suffered waiting for you. I believe I’m not jealous. I’m not
jealous: I believe you when you’re here; but when you’re
away somewhere leading your life, so incomprehensible to
me..’
She turned away from him, pulled the hook at last out
of the crochet work, and rapidly, with the help of her
forefinger, began working loop after loop of the wool that
was dazzling white in the lamplight, while the slender
wrist moved swiftly, nervously in the embroidered cuff.
‘How was it, then? Where did you meet Alexey
Alexandrovitch?’ Her voice sounded in an unnatural and
jarring tone.
‘We ran up against each other in the doorway.’
‘And he bowed to you like this?’
She drew a long face, and half-closing her eyes, quickly
transformed her expression, folded her hands, and Vronsky
suddenly saw in her beautiful face the very expression with
Anna Karenina
787 of 1759
which Alexey Alexandrovitch had bowed to him. He
smiled, while she laughed gaily, with that sweet, deep
laugh, which was one of her greatest charms.
‘I don’t understand him in the least,’ said Vronsky. ‘If
after your avowal to him at your country house he had
broken with you, if he had called me out—but this I can’t
understand. How can he put up with such a position? He
feels it, that’s evident.’
‘He?’ she said sneeringly. ‘He’s perfectly satisfied.’
‘What are we all miserable for, when everything might
be so happy?’
‘Only not he. Don’t I know him, the falsity in which
he’s utterly steeped?... Could one, with any feeling, live as
he is living with me? He understands nothing, and feels
nothing. Could a man of any feeling live in the same
house with his unfaithful wife? Could he talk to her, call
her ‘my dear’?’
And again she could not help mimicking him: ‘‘Anna,
ma chere; Anna, dear’!’
‘He’s not a man, not a human being—he’s a doll! No
one knows him; but I know him. Oh, if I’d been in his
place, I’d long ago have killed, have torn to pieces a wife
like me. I wouldn’t have said, ‘Anna, ma chere’! He’s not
a man, he’s an official machine. He doesn’t understand
Anna Karenina
788 of 1759
that I’m your wife, that he’s outside, that he’s
superfluous.... Don’t let’s talk of him!..’
‘You’re unfair, very unfair, dearest,’ said Vronsky,
trying to soothe her. ‘But never mind, don’t let’s talk of
him. Tell me what you’ve been doing? What is the
matter? What has been wrong with you, and what did the
doctor say?’
She looked at him with mocking amusement.
Evidently she had hit on other absurd and grotesque
aspects in her husband and was awaiting the moment to
give expression to them.
But he went on:
‘I imagine that it’s not illness, but your condition.
When will it be?’
The ironical light died away in her eyes, but a different
smile, a consciousness of something, he did not know
what, and of quiet melancholy, came over her face.
‘Soon, soon. You say that our position is miserable, that
we must put an end to it. If you knew how terrible it is to
me, what I would give to be able to love you freely and
boldly! I should not torture myself and torture you with
my jealousy.... And it will come soon but not as we
expect.’
Anna Karenina
789 of 1759
And at the thought of how it would come, she seemed
so pitiable to herself that tears came into her eyes, and she
could not go on. She laid her hand on his sleeve, dazzling
and white with its rings in the lamplight
‘It won’t come as we suppose. I didn’t mean to say this
to you, but you’ve made me. Soon, soon, all will be over,
and we shall all, all be at peace, and suffer no more.’
‘I don’t understand,’ he said, understanding her.
‘You asked when? Soon. And I shan’t live through it.
Don’t interrupt me!’ and she made haste to speak. ‘I know
it; I know for certain. I shall die; and I’m very glad I shall
die, and release myself and you.’
Tears dropped from her eyes; he bent down over her
hand and began kissing it, trying to hide his emotion,
which, he knew, had no sort of grounds, though he could
not control it.
‘Yes, it’s better so,’ she said, tightly gripping his hand.
‘That’s the only way, the only way left us.’
He had recovered himself, and lifted his head.
‘How absurd! What absurd nonsense you are talking!’
‘No, it’s the truth.’
‘What, what’s the truth?’
‘That I shall die. I have had a dream.’
Anna Karenina
790 of 1759
‘A dream?’ repeated Vronsky, and instantly he recalled
the peasant of his dream.
‘Yes, a dream,’ she said. ‘It’s a long while since I
dreamed it. I dreamed that I ran into my bedroom, that I
had to get something there, to find out something; you
know how it is in dreams,’ she said, her eyes wide with
horror; ‘and in the bedroom, in the corner, stood
something.’
‘Oh, what nonsense! How can you believe..’
But she would not let him interrupt her. What she was
saying was too important to her.
‘And the something turned round, and I saw it was a
peasant with a disheveled beard, little, and dreadful
looking. I wanted to run away, but he bent down over a
sack, and was fumbling there with his hands..’
She showed how he had moved his hands. There was
terror in her face. And Vronsky, remembering his dream,
felt the same terror filling his soul.
‘He was fumbling and kept talking quickly, quickly in
French, you know: Il faut le battre, le fer, le brayer, le
petrir.... And in my horror I tried to wake up, and woke
up...but woke up in the dream. And I began asking myself
what it meant. And Korney said to me: ‘In childbirth
you’ll die, ma’am, you’ll die....’ And I woke up.’
Anna Karenina
791 of 1759
‘What nonsense, what nonsense!’ said Vronsky; but he
felt himself that there was no conviction in his voice.
‘But don’t let’s talk of it. Ring the bell, I’ll have tea.
And stay a little now; it’s not long I shall..’
But all at once she stopped. The expression of her face
instantaneously changed. Horror and excitement were
suddenly replaced by a look of soft, solemn, blissful
attention. He could not comprehend the meaning of the
change. She was listening to the stirring of the new life
within her.
Anna Karenina
792 of 1759
Chapter 4
Alexey Alexandrovitch, after meeting Vronsky on his
own steps, drove, as he had intended, to the Italian opera.
He sat through two acts there, and saw everyone he had
wanted to see. On returning home, he carefully
scrutinized the hat stand, and noticing that there was not a
military overcoat there, he went, as usual, to his own
room. But, contrary to his usual habits, he did not go to
bed, he walked up and down his study till three o’clock in
the morning. The feeling of furious anger with his wife,
who would not observe the proprieties and keep to the
one stipulation he had laid on her, not to receive her lover
in her own home, gave him no peace. She had not
complied with his request, and he was bound to punish
her and carry out his threat—obtain a divorce and take
away his son. He knew all the difficulties connected with
this course, but he had said he would do it, and now he
must carry out his threat. Countess Lidia Ivanovna had
hinted that this was the best way out of his position, and
of late the obtaining of divorces had been brought to such
perfection that Alexey Alexandrovitch saw a possibility of
overcoming the formal difficulties. Misfortunes never
Anna Karenina
793 of 1759
come singly, and the affairs of the reorganization of the
native tribes, and of the irrigation of the lands of the
Zaraisky province, had brought such official worries upon
Alexey Alexandrovitch that he had been of late in a
continual condition of extreme irritability.
He did not sleep the whole night, and his fury,
growing in a sort of vast, arithmetical progression, reached
its highest limits in the morning. He dressed in haste, and
as though carrying his cup full of wrath, and fearing to
spill any over, fearing to lose with his wrath the energy
necessary for the interview with his wife, he went into her
room directly he heard she was up.
Anna, who had thought she knew her husband so well,
was amazed at his appearance when he went in to her. His
brow was lowering, and his eyes stared darkly before him,
avoiding her eyes; his mouth was tightly and
contemptuously shut. In his walk, in his gestures, in the
sound of his voice there was a determination and firmness
such as his wife had never seen in him. He went into her
room, and without greeting her, walked straight up to her
writing-table, and taking her keys, opened a drawer.
‘What do you want?’ she cried.
‘Your lover’s letters,’ he said.
Anna Karenina
794 of 1759
‘They’re not here,’ she said, shutting the drawer; but
from that action he saw he had guessed right, and roughly
pushing away her hand, he quickly snatched a portfolio in
which he knew she used to put her most important papers.
She tried to pull the portfolio away, but he pushed her
back.
‘Sit down! I have to speak to you,’ he said, putting the
portfolio under his arm, and squeezing it so tightly with
his elbow that his shoulder stood up. Amazed and
intimidated, she gazed at him in silence.
‘I told you that I would not allow you to receive your
lover in this house.’
‘I had to see him to..’
She stopped, not finding a reason.
‘I do not enter into the details of why a woman wants
to see her lover.’
‘I meant, I only...’ she said, flushing hotly. This
coarseness of his angered her, and gave her courage.
‘Surely you must feel how easy it is for you to insult me?’
she said.
‘An honest man and an honest woman may be insulted,
but to tell a thief he’s a thief is simply la constatation d’un
fait.’
‘This cruelty is something new I did not know in you.’
Anna Karenina
795 of 1759
‘You call it cruelty for a husband to give his wife
liberty, giving her the honorable protection of his name,
simply on the condition of observing the proprieties: is
that cruelty?’
‘It’s worse than cruel—it’s base, if you want to know!’
Anna cried, in a rush of hatred, and getting up, she was
going away.
‘No!’ he shrieked in his shrill voice, which pitched a
note higher than usual even, and his big hands clutching
her by the arm so violently that red marks were left from
the bracelet he was squeezing, he forcibly sat her down in
her place.
‘Base! If you care to use that word, what is base is to
forsake husband and child for a lover, while you eat your
husband’s bread!’
She bowed her head. She did not say what she had said
the evening before to her lover, that HE was her husband,
and her husband was superfluous; she did not even think
that. She felt all the justice of his words, and only said
softly:
‘You cannot describe my position as worse than I feel it
to be myself; but what are you saying all this for?’
‘What am I saying it for? what for?’ he went on, as
angrily. ‘That you may know that since you have not
Anna Karenina
796 of 1759
carried out my wishes in regard to observing outward
decorum, I will take measures to put an end to this state of
things.’
‘Soon, very soon, it will end, anyway,’ she said; and
again, at the thought of death near at hand and now
desired, tears came into her eyes.
‘It will end sooner than you and your lover have
planned! If you must have the satisfaction of animal
passion..’
‘Alexey Alexandrovitch! I won’t say it’s not generous,
but it’s not like a gentleman to strike anyone who’s
down.’
‘Yes, you only think of yourself! But the sufferings of a
man who was your husband have no interest for you. You
don’t care that his whole life is ruined, that he is
thuff...thuff..’
Alexey Alexandrovitch was speaking so quickly that he
stammered, and was utterly unable to articulate the word
‘suffering.’ In the end he pronounced it ‘thuffering.’ She
wanted to laugh, and was immediately ashamed that
anything could amuse her at such a moment. And for the
first time, for an instant, she felt for him, put herself in his
place, and was sorry for him. But what could she say or
do? Her head sank, and she sat silent. He too was silent for
Anna Karenina
797 of 1759
some time, and then began speaking in a frigid, less shrill
voice, emphasizing random words that had no
significance.
‘I came to tell you...’ he said.
She glanced at him. ‘No, it was my fancy,’ she thought,
recalling the expression of his face when he stumbled over
the word ‘suffering.’ ‘No; can a man with those dull eyes,
with that self-satisfied complacency, feel anything?’
‘I cannot change anything,’ she whispered.
‘I have come to tell you that I am going tomorrow to
Moscow, and shall not return again to this house, and you
will receive notice of what I decide through the lawyer
into whose hands I shall intrust the task of getting a
divorce. My son is going to my sister’s,’ said Alexey
Alexandrovitch, with an effort recalling what he had
meant to say about his son.
‘You take Seryozha to hurt me,’ she said, looking at
him from under her brows. ‘You do not love him....
Leave me Seryozha!’
‘Yes, I have lost even my affection for my son, because
he is associated with the repulsion I feel for you. But still I
shall take him. Goodbye!’
And he was going away, but now she detained him.
Anna Karenina
798 of 1759
‘Alexey Alexandrovitch, leave me Seryozha!’ she
whispered once more. ‘I have nothing else to say. Leave
Seryozha till my...I shall soon be confined; leave him!’
Alexey Alexandrovitch flew into a rage, and, snatching
his hand from her, he went out of the room without a
word.
Anna Karenina
799 of 1759
Chapter 5
The waiting-room of the celebrated Petersburg lawyer
was full when Alexey Alexandrovitch entered it. Three
ladies—an old lady, a young lady, and a merchant’s wife—
and three gentlemen— one a German banker with a ring
on his finger, the second a merchant with a beard, and the
third a wrathful-looking government clerk in official
uniform, with a cross on his neck— had obviously been
waiting a long while already. Two clerks were writing at
tables with scratching pens. The appurtenances of the
writing-tables, about which Alexey Alexandrovitch was
himself very fastidious, were exceptionally good. He could
not help observing this. One of the clerks, without getting
up, turned wrathfully to Alexey Alexandrovitch, half
closing his eyes. ‘What are you wanting?’
He replied that he had to see the lawyer on some
business.
‘He is engaged,’ the clerk responded severely, and he
pointed with his pen at the persons waiting, and went on
writing.
‘Can’t he spare time to see me?’ said Alexey
Alexandrovitch.
Anna Karenina
800 of 1759
‘He has not time free; he is always busy. Kindly wait
your turn.’
‘Then I must trouble you to give him my card,’ Alexey
Alexandrovitch said with dignity, seeing the impossibility
of preserving his incognito.
The clerk took the card and, obviously not approving
of what he read on it, went to the door.
Alexey Alexandrovitch was in principle in favor of the
publicity of legal proceedings, though for some higher
official considerations he disliked the application of the
principle in Russia, and disapproved of it, as far as he
could disapprove of anything instituted by authority of the
Emperor. His whole life had been spent in administrative
work, and consequently, when he did not approve of
anything, his disapproval was softened by the recognition
of the inevitability of mistakes and the possibility of reform
in every department. In the new public law courts he
disliked the restrictions laid on the lawyers conducting
cases. But till then he had had nothing to do with the law
courts, and so had disapproved of their publicity simply in
theory; now his disapprobation was strengthened by the
unpleasant impression made on him in the lawyer’s
waiting room.
about which I have to speak to you is to be strictly
private.’
The lawyer’s overhanging reddish mustaches were
parted in a scarcely perceptible smile.
‘I should not be a lawyer if I could not keep the secrets
confided to me. But if you would like proof..’
Alexey Alexandrovitch glanced at his face, and saw that
the shrewd, gray eyes were laughing, and seemed to know
all about it already.
‘You know my name?’ Alexey Alexandrovitch
resumed.
‘I know you and the good’—again he caught a moth—
‘work you are doing, like every Russian,’ said the lawyer,
bowing.
Alexey Alexandrovitch sighed, plucking up his courage.
But having once made up his mind he went on in his shrill
voice, without timidity—or hesitation, accentuating here
and there a word.
‘I have the misfortune,’ Alexey Alexandrovitch began,
‘to have been deceived in my married life, and I desire to
break off all relations with my wife by legal means—that
is, to be divorced, but to do this so that my son may not
remain with his mother.’
Anna Karenina
803 of 1759
The lawyer’s gray eyes tried not to laugh, but they
were dancing with irrepressible glee, and Alexey
Alexandrovitch saw that it was not simply the delight of a
man who has just got a profitable job: there was triumph
and joy, there was a gleam like the malignant gleam he
saw in his wife’s eyes.
‘You desire my assistance in securing a divorce?’
‘Yes, precisely so; but I ought to warn you that I may
be wasting your time and attention. I have come simply to
consult you as a preliminary step. I want a divorce, but the
form in which it is possible is of great consequence to me.
It is very possible that if that form does not correspond
with my requirements I may give up a legal divorce.’
‘Oh, that’s always the case,’ said the lawyer, ‘and that’s
always for you to decide.’
He let his eyes rest on Alexey Alexandrovitch’s feet,
feeling that he might offend his client by the sight of his
irrepressible amusement. He looked at a moth that flew
before his nose, and moved his hands, but did not catch it
from regard for Alexey Alexandrovitch’s position.
‘Though in their general features our laws on this
subject are known to me,’ pursued Alexey
Alexandrovitch, ‘I should be glad to have an idea of the
forms in which such things are done in practice.’
Anna Karenina
804 of 1759
‘You would be glad,’ the lawyer, without lifting his
eyes, responded, adopting, with a certain satisfaction, the
tone of his client’s remarks, ‘for me to lay before you all
the methods by which you could secure what you desire?’
And on receiving an assuring nod from Alexey
Alexandrovitch, he went on, stealing a glance now and
then at Alexey Alexandrovitch’s face, which was growing
red in patches.
‘Divorce by our laws,’ he said, with a slight shade of
disapprobation of our laws, ‘is possible, as you are aware,
in the following cases.... Wait a little!’ he called to a clerk
who put his head in at the door, but he got up all the
same, said a few words to him, and sat down again. ‘...In
the following cases: physical defect in the married parties,
desertion without communication for five years,’ he said,
crooking a short finger covered with hair, ‘adultery’ (this
word he pronounced with obvious satisfaction),
‘subdivided as follows’ (he continued to crook his fat
fingers, though the three cases and their subdivisions could
obviously not be classified together): ‘physical defect of the
husband or of the wife, adultery of the husband or of the
wife.’ As by now all his fingers were used up, he
uncrooked all his fingers and went on: ‘This is the
theoretical view; but I imagine you have done me the
Anna Karenina
805 of 1759
honor to apply to me in order to learn its application in
practice. And therefore, guided by precedents, I must
inform you that in practice cases of divorce may all be
reduced to the following— there’s no physical defect, I
may assume, nor desertion?..’
Alexey Alexandrovitch bowed his head in assent.
‘—May be reduced to the following: adultery of one of
the married parties, and the detection in the fact of the
guilty party by mutual agreement, and failing such
agreement, accidental detection. It must be admitted that
the latter case is rarely met with in practice,’ said the
lawyer, and stealing a glance at Alexey Alexandrovitch he
paused, as a man selling pistols, after enlarging on the
advantages of each weapon, might await his customer’s
choice. But Alexey Alexandrovitch said nothing, and
therefore the lawyer went on: ‘The most usual and simple,
the sensible course, I consider, is adultery by mutual
consent. I should not permit myself to express it so,
speaking with a man of no education,’ he said, ‘but I
imagine that to you this is comprehensible.’
Alexey Alexandrovitch was, however, so perturbed that
he did not immediately comprehend all the good sense of
adultery by mutual consent, and his eyes expressed this
Anna Karenina
806 of 1759
uncertainty; but the lawyer promptly came to his
assistance.
‘People cannot go on living together—here you have a
fact. And if both are agreed about it, the details and
formalities become a matter of no importance. And at the
same time this is the simplest and most certain method.’
Alexey Alexandrovitch fully understood now. But he
had religious scruples, which hindered the execution of
such a plan.
‘That is out of the question in the present case,’ he said.
‘Only one alternative is possible: undesigned detection,
supported by letters which I have.’
At the mention of letters the lawyer pursed up his lips,
and gave utterance to a thin little compassionate and
contemptuous sound.
‘Kindly consider,’ he began, ‘cases of that kind are, as
you are aware, under ecclesiastical jurisdiction; the
reverend fathers are fond of going into the minutest details
in cases of that kind,’ he said with a smile, which betrayed
his sympathy with the reverend fathers’ taste. ‘Letters may,
of course, be a partial confirmation; but detection in the
fact there must be of the most direct kind, that is, by
eyewitnesses. In fact, if you do me the honor to intrust
your confidence to me, you will do well to leave me the
Anna Karenina
807 of 1759
choice of the measures to be employed. If one wants the
result, one must admit the means.’
‘If it is so...’ Alexey Alexandrovitch began, suddenly
turning white; but at that moment the lawyer rose and
again went to the door to speak to the intruding clerk.
‘Tell her we don’t haggle over fees!’ he said, and
returned to Alexey Alexandrovitch.
On his way back he caught unobserved another moth.
‘Nice state my rep curtains will be in by the summer!’ he
thought, frowning.
‘And so you were saying?...’ he said.
‘I will communicate my decision to you by letter,’ said
Alexey Alexandrovitch, getting up, and he clutched at the
table. After standing a moment in silence, he said: ‘From
your words I may consequently conclude that a divorce
may be obtained? I would ask you to let me know what
are your terms.’
‘It may be obtained if you give me complete liberty of
action,’ said the lawyer, not answering his question.
‘When can I reckon on receiving information from you?’
he asked, moving towards the door, his eyes and his
varnished boots shining.
Anna Karenina
808 of 1759
‘In a week’s time. Your answer as to whether you will
undertake to conduct the case, and on what terms, you
will be so good as to communicate to me.’
‘Very good.’
The lawyer bowed respectfully, let his client out of the
door, and, left alone, gave himself up to his sense of
amusement. He felt so mirthful that, contrary to his rules,
he made a reduction in his terms to the haggling lady, and
gave up catching moths, finally deciding that next winter
he must have the furniture covered with velvet, like
Sigonin’s.
Chapter 6
Alexey Alexandrovitch had gained a brilliant victory at
the sitting of the Commission of the 17th of August, but
in the sequel this victory cut the ground from under his
feet. The new commission for the inquiry into the
condition of the native tribes in all its branches had been
formed and despatched to its destination with an unusual
speed and energy inspired by Alexey Alexandrovitch.
Within three months a report was presented. The
condition of the native tribes was investigated in its
political, administrative, economic, ethnographic, material,
and religious aspects. To all these questions there were
answers admirably stated, and answers admitting no shade
of doubt, since they were not a product of human
thought, always liable to error, but were all the product of
official activity. The answers were all based on official data
furnished by governors and heads of churches, and
founded on the reports of district magistrates and
ecclesiastical superintendents, founded in their turn on the
reports of parochial overseers and parish priests; and so all
of these answers were unhesitating and certain. All such
questions as, for instance, of the cause of failure of crops,
Anna Karenina
810 of 1759
of the adherence of certain tribes to their ancient beliefs,
etc.— questions which, but for the convenient
intervention of the official machine, are not, and cannot
be solved for ages— received full, unhesitating solution.
And this solution was in favor of Alexey Alexandrovitch’s
contention. But Stremov, who had felt stung to the quick
at the last sitting, had, on the reception of the
commission’s report, resorted to tactics which Alexey
Alexandrovitch had not anticipated. Stremov, carrying
with him several members, went over to Alexey
Alexandrovitch’s side, and not contenting himself with
warmly defending the measure proposed by Karenin,
proposed other more extreme measures in the same
direction. These measures, still further exaggerated in
opposition to what was Alexey Alexandrovitch’s
fundamental idea, were passed by the commission, and
then the aim of Stremov’s tactics became apparent.
Carried to an extreme, the measures seemed at once to be
so absurd that the highest authorities, and public opinion,
and intellectual ladies, and the newspapers, all at the same
time fell foul of them, expressing their indignation both
with the measures and their nominal father, Alexey
Alexandrovitch. Stremov drew back, affecting to have
blindly followed Karenin, and to be astounded and
Anna Karenina
811 of 1759
distressed at what had been done. This meant the defeat of
Alexey Alexandrovitch. But in spite of failing health, in
spite of his domestic griefs, he did not give in. There was a
split in the commission. Some members, with Stremov at
their head, justified their mistake on the ground that they
had put faith in the commission of revision, instituted by
Alexey Alexandrovitch, and maintained that the report of
the commission was rubbish, and simply so much waste
paper. Alexey Alexandrovitch, with a following of those
who saw the danger of so revolutionary an attitude to
official documents, persisted in upholding the statements
obtained by the revising commission. In consequence of
this, in the higher spheres, and even in society, all was
chaos, and although everyone was interested, no one
could tell whether the native tribes really were becoming
impoverished and ruined, or whether they were in a
flourishing condition. The position of Alexey
Alexandrovitch, owing to this, and partly owing to the
contempt lavished on him for his wife’s infidelity, became
very precarious. And in this position he took an important
resolution. To the astonishment of the commission, he
announced that he should ask permission to go himself to
investigate the question on the spot. And having obtained
Anna Karenina
812 of 1759
permission, Alexey Alexandrovitch prepared to set off to
these remote provinces.
Alexey Alexandrovitch’s departure made a great
sensation, the more so as just before he started he officially
returned the posting-fares allowed him for twelve horses,
to drive to his destination.
‘I think it very noble,’ Betsy said about this to the
Princess Myakaya. ‘Why take money for posting-horses
when everyone knows that there are railways everywhere
now?’
But Princess Myakaya did not agree, and the Princess
Tverskaya’s opinion annoyed her indeed.
‘It’s all very well for you to talk,’ said she, ‘when you
have I don’t know how many millions; but I am very glad
when my husband goes on a revising tour in the summer.
It’s very good for him and pleasant traveling about, and it’s
a settled arrangement for me to keep a carriage and
coachman on the money.’
On his way to the remote provinces Alexey
Alexandrovitch stopped for three days at Moscow.
The day after his arrival he was driving back from
calling on the governor-general. At the crossroads by
Gazetoy Place, where there are always crowds of carriages
and sledges, Alexey Alexandrovitch suddenly heard his
Anna Karenina
813 of 1759
name called out in such a loud and cheerful voice that he
could not help looking round. At the corner of the
pavement, in a short, stylish overcoat and a low-crowned
fashionable hat, jauntily askew, with a smile that showed a
gleam of white teeth and red lips, stood Stepan
Arkadyevitch, radiant, young, and beaming. He called him
vigorously and urgently, and insisted on his stopping. He
had one arm on the window of a carriage that was
stopping at the corner, and out of the window were thrust
the heads of a lady in a velvet hat, and two children.
Stepan Arkadyevitch was smiling and beckoning to his
brother-in-law. The lady smiled a kindly smile too, and
she too waved her hand to Alexey Alexandrovitch. It was
Dolly with her children.
Alexey Alexandrovitch did not want to see anyone in
Moscow, and least of all his wife’s brother. He raised his
hat and would have driven on, but Stepan Arkadyevitch
told his coachman to stop, and ran across the snow to him.
‘Well, what a shame not to have let us know! Been
here long? I was at Dussot’s yesterday and saw ‘Karenin’
on the visitors’ list, but it never entered my head that it
was you,’ said Stepan Arkadyevitch, sticking his head in at
the window of the carriage, ‘or I should have looked you
up. I am glad to see you!’ he said, knocking one foot
Anna Karenina
814 of 1759
against the other to shake the snow off. ‘What a shame of
you not to let us know!’ he repeated.
‘I had no time; I am very busy,’ Alexey Alexandrovitch
responded dryly.
‘Come to my wife, she does so want to see you.’
Alexey Alexandrovitch unfolded the rug in which his
frozen feet were wrapped, and getting out of his carriage
made his way over the snow to Darya Alexandrovna.
‘Why, Alexey Alexandrovitch, what are you cutting us
like this for?’ said Dolly, smiling.
‘I was very busy. Delighted to see you!’ he said in a
tone clearly indicating that he was annoyed by it. ‘How
are you?’
‘Tell me, how is my darling Anna?’
Alexey Alexandrovitch mumbled something and would
have gone on. But Stepan Arkadyevitch stopped him.
‘I tell you what we’ll do tomorrow. Dolly, ask him to
dinner. We’ll ask Koznishev and Pestsov, so as to entertain
him with our Moscow celebrities.’
‘Yes, please, do come,’ said Dolly; ‘we will expect you
at five, or six o’clock, if you like. How is my darling
Anna? How long..’
Anna Karenina
815 of 1759
‘She is quite well,’ Alexey Alexandrovitch mumbled,
frowning. ‘Delighted!’ and he moved away towards his
carriage.
‘You will come?’ Dolly called after him.
Alexey Alexandrovitch said something which Dolly
could not catch in the noise of the moving carriages.
‘I shall come round tomorrow!’ Stepan Arkadyevitch
shouted to him.
Alexey Alexandrovitch got into his carriage, and buried
himself in it so as neither to see nor be seen.
‘Queer fish!’ said Stepan Arkadyevitch to his wife, and
glancing at his watch, he made a motion of his hand
before his face, indicating a caress to his wife and children,
and walked jauntily along the pavement.
‘Stiva! Stiva!’ Dolly called, reddening.
He turned round.
‘I must get coats, you know, for Grisha and Tanya.
Give me the money.’
‘Never mind; you tell them I’ll pay the bill!’ and he
vanished, nodding genially to an acquaintance who drove
by.
Anna Karenina
816 of 1759
Chapter 7
The next day was Sunday. Stepan Arkadyevitch went
to the Grand Theater to a rehearsal of the ballet, and gave
Masha Tchibisova, a pretty dancing-girl whom he had just
taken under his protection, the coral necklace he had
promised her the evening before, and behind the scenes in
the dim daylight of the theater, managed to kiss her pretty
little face, radiant over her present. Besides the gift of the
necklace he wanted to arrange with her about meeting
after the ballet. After explaining that he could not come at
the beginning of the ballet, he promised he would come
for the last act and take her to supper. From the theater
Stepan Arkadyevitch drove to Ohotny Row, selected
himself the fish and asparagus for dinner, and by twelve
o’clock was at Dussot’s, where he had to see three people,
luckily all staying at the same hotel: Levin, who had
recently come back from abroad and was staying there; the
new head of his department, who had just been promoted
to that position, and had come on a tour of revision to
Moscow; and his brother-in-law, Karenin, whom he must
see, so as to be sure of bringing him to dinner.
Anna Karenina
817 of 1759
Stepan Arkadyevitch liked dining, but still better he
liked to give a dinner, small, but very choice, both as
regards the food and drink and as regards the selection of
guests. He particularly liked the program of that day’s
dinner. There would be fresh perch, asparagus, and la
piece de resistance— first-rate, but quite plain, roast beef,
and wines to suit: so much for the eating and drinking.
Kitty and Levin would be of the party, and that this might
not be obtrusively evident, there would be a girl cousin
too, and young Shtcherbatsky, and la piece de resistance
among the guests—Sergey Koznishev and Alexey
Alexandrovitch. Sergey Ivanovitch was a Moscow man,
and a philosopher; Alexey Alexandrovitch a Petersburger,
and a practical politician. He was asking, too, the wellknown eccentric enthusiast, Pestsov, a liberal, a great
talker, a musician, an historian, and the most delightfully
youthful person of fifty, who would be a sauce or garnish
for Koznishev and Karenin. He would provoke them and
set them off.
The second installment for the forest had been received
from the merchant and was not yet exhausted; Dolly had
been very amiable and goodhumored of late, and the idea
of the dinner pleased Stepan Arkadyevitch from every
point of view. He was in the most light-hearted mood.
Anna Karenina
818 of 1759
There were two circumstances a little unpleasant, but
these two circumstances were drowned in the sea of goodhumored gaiety which flooded the soul of Stepan
Arkadyevitch. These two circumstances were: first, that on
meeting Alexey Alexandrovitch the day before in the
street he had noticed that he was cold and reserved with
him, and putting the expression of Alexey
Alexandrovitch’s face and the fact that he had not come to
see them or let them know of his arrival with the rumors
he had heard about Anna and Vronsky, Stepan
Arkadyevitch guessed that something was wrong between
the husband and wife.
That was one disagreeable thing. The other slightly
disagreeable fact was that the new head of his department,
like all new heads, had the reputation already of a terrible
person, who got up at six o’clock in the morning, worked
like a horse, and insisted on his subordinates working in
the same way. Moreover, this new head had the further
reputation of being a bear in his manners, and was,
according to all reports, a man of a class in all respects the
opposite of that to which his predecessor had belonged,
and to which Stepan Arkadyevitch had hitherto belonged
himself. On the previous day Stepan Arkadyevitch had
appeared at the office in a uniform, and the new chief had
Anna Karenina
819 of 1759
been very affable and had talked to him as to an
acquaintance. Consequently Stepan Arkadyevitch deemed
it his duty to call upon him in his non-official dress. The
thought that the new chief might not tender him a warm
reception was the other unpleasant thing. But Stepan
Arkadyevitch instinctively felt that everything would come
round all right. ‘They’re all people, all men, like us poor
sinners; why be nasty and quarrelsome?’ he thought as he
went into the hotel.
‘Good-day, Vassily,’ he said, walking into the corridor
with his hat cocked on one side, and addressing a footman
he knew; ‘why, you’ve let your whiskers grow! Levin,
number seven, eh? Take me up, please. And find out
whether Count Anitchkin’ (this was the new head) ‘is
receiving.’
‘Yes, sir,’ Vassily responded, smiling. ‘You’ve not been
to see us for a long while.’
‘I was here yesterday, but at the other entrance. Is this
number seven?’
Levin was standing with a peasant from Tver in the
middle of the room, measuring a fresh bearskin, when
Stepan Arkadyevitch went in.
‘What! you killed him?’ cried Stepan Arkadyevitch.
‘Well done! A she-bear? How are you, Arhip!’
Anna Karenina
820 of 1759
He shook hands with the peasant and sat down on the
edge of a chair, without taking off his coat and hat.
‘Come, take off your coat and stay a little,’ said Levin,
taking his hat.
‘No, I haven’t time; I’ve only looked in for a tiny
second,’ answered Stepan Arkadyevitch. He threw open
his coat, but afterwards did take it off, and sat on for a
whole hour, talking to Levin about hunting and the most
intimate subjects.
‘Come, tell me, please, what you did abroad? Where
have you been?’ said Stepan Arkadyevitch, when the
peasant had gone.
‘Oh, I stayed in Germany, in Prussia, in France, and in
England— not in the capitals, but in the manufacturing
towns, and saw a great deal that was new to me. And I’m
glad I went.’
‘Yes, I knew your idea of the solution of the labor
question.’
‘Not a bit: in Russia there can be no labor question. In
Russia the question is that of the relation of the working
people to the land; though the question exists there too—
but there it’s a matter of repairing what’s been ruined,
while with us..’
Stepan Arkadyevitch listened attentively to Levin.
Anna Karenina
821 of 1759
‘Yes, yes!’ he said, ‘it’s very possible you’re right. But
I’m glad you’re in good spirits, and are hunting bears, and
working, and interested. Shtcherbatsky told me another
story—he met you—that you were in such a depressed
state, talking of nothing but death...’
‘Well, what of it? I’ve not given up thinking of death,’
said Levin. ‘It’s true that it’s high time I was dead; and that
all this is nonsense. It’s the truth I’m telling you. I do
value my idea and my work awfully; but in reality only
consider this: all this world of ours is nothing but a speck
of mildew, which has grown up on a tiny planet. And for
us to suppose we can have something great—ideas,
work—it’s all dust and ashes.’
‘But all that’s as old as the hills, my boy!’
‘It is old; but do you know, when you grasp this fully,
then somehow everything becomes of no consequence.
When you understand that you will die tomorrow, if not
today, and nothing will be left, then everything is so
unimportant! And I consider my idea very important, but
it turns out really to be as unimportant too, even if it were
carried out, as doing for that bear. So one goes on living,
amusing oneself with hunting, with work—anything so as
not to think of death!’
Anna Karenina
822 of 1759
Stepan Arkadyevitch smiled a subtle affectionate smile
as he listened to Levin.
‘Well, of course! Here you’ve come round to my
point. Do you remember you attacked me for seeking
enjoyment in life? Don’t be so severe, O moralist!’
‘No; all the same, what’s fine in life is...’ Levin
hesitated— ‘oh, I don’t know. All I know is that we shall
soon be dead.’
‘Why so soon?’
‘And do you know, there’s less charm in life, when one
thinks of death, but there’s more peace.’
‘On the contrary, the finish is always the best. But I
must be going,’ said Stepan Arkadyevitch, getting up for
the tenth time.
‘Oh, no, stay a bit!’ said Levin, keeping him. ‘Now,
when shall we see each other again? I’m going tomorrow.’
‘I’m a nice person! Why, that’s just what I came for!
You simply must come to dinner with us today. Your
brother’s coming, and Karenin, my brother-in-law.’
‘You don’t mean to say he’s here?’ said Levin, and he
wanted to inquire about Kitty. He had heard at the
beginning of the winter that she was at Petersburg with
her sister, the wife of the diplomat, and he did not know
whether she had come back or not; but he changed his
Anna Karenina
823 of 1759
mind and did not ask. ‘Whether she’s coming or not, I
don’t care,’ he said to himself.
‘So you’ll come?’
‘Of course.’
‘At five o’clock, then, and not evening dress.’
And Stepan Arkadyevitch got up and went down
below to the new head of his department. Istinct had not
misled Stepan Arkadyevitch. The terrible new head turned
out to be an extremely amenable person, and Stepan
Arkadyevitch lunched with him and stayed on, so that it
was four o’clock before he got to Alexey Alexandrovitch.
Anna Karenina
824 of 1759
Chapter 8
Alexey Alexandrovitch, on coming back from church
service, had spent the whole morning indoors. He had
two pieces of business before him that morning; first, to
receive and send on a deputation from the native tribes
which was on its way to Petersburg, and now at Moscow;
secondly, to write the promised letter to the lawyer. The
deputation, though it had been summoned at Alexey
Alexandrovitch’s instigation, was not without its
discomforting and even dangerous aspect, and he was glad
he had found it in Moscow. The members of this
deputation had not the slightest conception of their duty
and the part they were to play. They naively believed that
it was their business to lay before the commission their
needs and the actual condition of things, and to ask
assistance of the government, and utterly failed to grasp
that some of their statements and requests supported the
contention of the enemy’s side, and so spoiled the whole
business. Alexey Alexandrovitch was busily engaged with
them for a long while, drew up a program for them from
which they were not to depart, and on dismissing them
wrote a letter to Petersburg for the guidance of the
Anna Karenina
825 of 1759
deputation. He had his chief support in this affair in the
Countess Lidia Ivanovna. She was a specialist in the matter
of deputations, and no one knew better than she how to
manage them, and put them in the way they should go.
Having completed this task, Alexey Alexandrovitch wrote
the letter to the lawyer. Without the slightest hesitation he
gave him permission to act as he might judge best. In the
letter he enclosed three of Vronsky’s notes to Anna, which
were in the portfolio he had taken away.
Since Alexey Alexandrovitch had left home with the
intention of not returning to his family again, and since he
had been at the lawyer’s and had spoken, though only to
one man, of his intention, since especially he had
translated the matter from the world of real life to the
world of ink and paper, he had grown more and more
used to his own intention, and by now distinctly perceived
the feasibility of its execution.
He was sealing the envelope to the lawyer, when he
heard the loud tones of Stepan Arkadyevitch’s voice.
Stepan Arkadyevitch was disputing with Alexey
Alexandrovitch’s servant, and insisting on being
announced.
‘No matter,’ thought Alexey Alexandrovitch, ‘so much
the better. I will inform him at once of my position in
Anna Karenina
826 of 1759
regard to his sister, and explain why it is I can’t dine with
him.’
‘Come in!’ he said aloud, collecting his papers, and
putting them in the blotting-paper.
‘There, you see, you’re talking nonsense, and he’s at
home!’ responded Stepan Arkadyevitch’s voice, addressing
the servant, who had refused to let him in, and taking off
his coat as he went, Oblonsky walked into the room.
‘Well, I’m awfully glad I’ve found you! So I hope...’
Stepan Arkadyevitch began cheerfully.
‘I cannot come,’ Alexey Alexandrovitch said coldly,
standing and not asking his visitor to sit down.
Alexey Alexandrovitch had thought to pass at once into
those frigid relations in which he ought to stand with the
brother of a wife against whom he was beginning a suit for
divorce. But he had not taken into account the ocean of
kindliness brimming over in the heart of Stepan
Arkadyevitch.
Stepan Arkadyevitch opened wide his clear, shining
eyes.
‘Why can’t you? What do you mean?’ he asked in
perplexity, speaking in French. ‘Oh, but it’s a promise.
And we’re all counting on you.’
Anna Karenina
827 of 1759
‘I want to tell you that I can’t dine at your house,
because the terms of relationship which have existed
between us must cease.’
‘How? How do you mean? What for?’ said Stepan
Arkadyevitch with a smile.
‘Because I am beginning an action for divorce against
your sister, my wife. I ought to have..’
But, before Alexey Alexandrovitch had time to finish
his sentence, Stepan Arkadyevitch was behaving not at all
as he had expected. He groaned and sank into an
armchair.
‘No, Alexey Alexandrovitch! What are you saying?’
cried Oblonsky, and his suffering was apparent in his face.
‘It is so.’
‘Excuse me, I can’t, I can’t believe it!’
Alexey Alexandrovitch sat down, feeling that his words
had not had the effect he anticipated, and that it would be
unavoidable for him to explain his position, and that,
whatever explanations he might make, his relations with
his brother-in-law would remain unchanged.
‘Yes, I am brought to the painful necessity of seeking a
divorce,’ he said.
‘I will say one thing, Alexey Alexandrovitch. I know
you for an excellent, upright man; I know Anna—excuse
Anna Karenina
828 of 1759
me, I can’t change my opinion of her—for a good, an
excellent woman; and so, excuse me, I cannot believe it.
There is some misunderstanding,’ said he.
‘Oh, if it were merely a misunderstanding!..’
‘Pardon, I understand,’ interposed Stepan
Arkadyevitch. ‘But of course.... One thing: you must not
act in haste. You must not, you must not act in haste!’
‘I am not acting in haste,’ Alexey Alexandrovitch said
coldly, ‘but one cannot ask advice of anyone in such a
matter. I have quite made up my mind.
‘This is awful!’ said Stepan Arkadyevitch. ‘I would do
one thing, Alexey Alexandrovitch. I beseech you, do it!’
he said. ‘No action has yet been taken, if I understand
rightly. Before you take advice, see my wife, talk to her.
She loves Anna like a sister, she loves you, and she’s a
wonderful woman. For God’s sake, talk to her! Do me
that favor, I beseech you!’
Alexey Alexandrovitch pondered, and Stepan
Arkadyevitch looked at him sympathetically, without
interrupting his silence.
‘You will go to see her?’
‘I don’t know. That was just why I have not been to
see you. I imagine our relations must change.’
Anna Karenina
829 of 1759
‘Why so? I don’t see that. Allow me to believe that
apart from our connection you have for me, at least in
part, the same friendly feeling I have always had for
you...and sincere esteem,’ said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
pressing his hand. ‘Even if your worst suppositions were
correct, I don’t—and never would—take on myself to
judge either side, and I see no reason why our relations
should be affected. But now, do this, come and see my
wife.’
‘Well, we look at the matter differently,’ said Alexey
Alexandrovitch coldly. ‘However, we won’t discuss it.’
‘No; why shouldn’t you come today to dine, anyway?
My wife’s expecting you. Please, do come. And, above all,
talk it over with her. She’s a wonderful woman. For God’s
sake, on my knees, I implore you!’
‘If you so much wish it, I will come,’ said Alexey
Alexandrovitch, sighing.
And, anxious to change the conversation, he inquired
about what interested them both—the new head of Stepan
Arkadyevitch’s department, a man not yet old, who had
suddenly been promoted to so high a position.
Alexey Alexandrovitch had previously felt no liking for
Count Anitchkin, and had always differed from him in his
opinions. But now, from a feeling readily comprehensible
Anna Karenina
830 of 1759
to officials—that hatred felt by one who has suffered a
defeat in the service for one who has received a
promotion, he could not endure him.
‘Well, have you seen him?’ said Alexey Alexandrovitch
with a malignant smile.
‘Of course; he was at our sitting yesterday. He seems to
know his work capitally, and to be very energetic.’
‘Yes, but what is his energy directed to?’ said Alexey
Alexandrovitch. ‘Is he aiming at doing anything, or simply
undoing what’s been done? It’s the great misfortune of our
government—this paper administration, of which he’s a
worthy representative.’
‘Really, I don’t know what fault one could find with
him. His policy I don’t know, but one thing—he’s a very
nice fellow,’ answered Stepan Arkadyevitch. ‘I’ve just
been seeing him, and he’s really a capital fellow. We
lunched together, and I taught him how to make, you
know that drink, wine and oranges. It’s so cooling. And
it’s a wonder he didn’t know it. He liked it awfully. No,
really he’s a capital fellow.’
Stepan Arkadyevitch glanced at his watch.
‘Why, good heavens, it’s four already, and I’ve still to
go to Dolgovushin’s! So please come round to dinner.
You can’t imagine how you will grieve my wife and me.’
Anna Karenina
831 of 1759
The way in which Alexey Alexandrovitch saw his
brother-in-law out was very different from the manner in
which he had met him.
‘I’ve promised, and I’ll come,’ he answered wearily.
‘Believe me, I appreciate it, and I hope you won’t
regret it,’ answered Stepan Arkadyevitch, smiling.
And, putting on his coat as he went, he patted the
footman on the head, chuckled, and went out.
‘At five o’clock, and not evening dress, please,’ he
shouted once more, turning at the door.
Anna Karenina
832 of 1759
Chapter 9
It was past five, and several guests had already arrived,
before the host himself got home. He went in together
with Sergey Ivanovitch Koznishev and Pestsov, who had
reached the street door at the same moment. These were
the two leading representatives of the Moscow
intellectuals, as Oblonsky had called them. Both were men
respected for their character and their intelligence. They
respected each other, but were in complete and hopeless
disagreement upon almost every subject, not because they
belonged to opposite parties, but precisely because they
were of the same party (their enemies refused to see any
distinction between their views); but, in that party, each
had his own special shade of opinion. And since no
difference is less easily overcome than the difference of
opinion about semi-abstract questions, they never agreed
in any opinion, and had long, indeed, been accustomed to
jeer without anger, each at the other’s incorrigible
aberrations.
They were just going in at the door, talking of the
weather, when Stepan Arkadyevitch overtook them. In
the drawing room there were already sitting Prince
Anna Karenina
833 of 1759
Alexander Dmitrievitch Shtcherbatsky, young
Shtcherbatsky, Turovtsin, Kitty, and Karenin.
Stepan Arkadyevitch saw immediately that things were
not going well in the drawing-room without him. Darya
Alexandrovna, in her best gray silk gown, obviously
worried about the children, who were to have their
dinner by themselves in the nursery, and by her husband’s
absence, was not equal to the task of making the party mix
without him. All were sitting like so many priests’ wives
on a visit (so the old prince expressed it), obviously
wondering why they were there, and pumping up remarks
simply to avoid being silent. Turovtsin—good, simple
man—felt unmistakably a fish out of water, and the smile
with which his thick lips greeted Stepan Arkadyevitch
said, as plainly as words: ‘Well, old boy, you have popped
me down in a learned set! A drinking party now, or the
Chateau des Fleurs, would be more in my line!’ The old
prince sat in silence, his bright little eyes watching Karenin
from one side, and Stepan Arkadyevitch saw that he had
already formed a phrase to sum up that politician of whom
guests were invited to partake as though he were a
sturgeon. Kitty was looking at the door, calling up all her
energies to keep her from blushing at the entrance of
Konstantin Levin. Young Shtcherbatsky, who had not
Anna Karenina
834 of 1759
been introduced to Karenin, was trying to look as though
he were not in the least conscious of it. Karenin himself
had followed the Petersburg fashion for a dinner with
ladies and was wearing evening dress and a white tie.
Stepan Arkadyevitch saw by his face that he had come
simply to keep his promise, and was performing a
disagreeable duty in being present at this gathering. He
was indeed the person chiefly responsible for the chill
benumbing all the guests before Stepan Arkadyevitch
came in.
On entering the drawing room Stepan Arkadyevitch
apologized, explaining that he had been detained by that
prince, who was always the scapegoat for all his absences
and unpunctualities, and in one moment he had made all
the guests acquainted with each other, and, bringing
together Alexey Alexandrovitch and Sergey Koznishev,
started them on a discussion of the Russification of
Poland, into which they immediately plunged with
Pestsov. Slapping Turovtsin on the shoulder, he whispered
something comic in his ear, and set him down by his wife
and the old prince. Then he told Kitty she was looking
very pretty that evening, and presented Shtcherbatsky to
Karenin. In a moment he had so kneaded together the
social dough that the drawing room became very lively,
Anna Karenina
835 of 1759
and there was a merry buzz of voices. Konstantin Levin
was the only person who had not arrived. But this was so
much the better, as going into the dining room, Stepan
Arkadyevitch found to his horror that the port and sherry
had been procured from Depre, and not from Levy, and,
directing that the coachman should be sent off as speedily
as possible to Levy’s, he was going back to the drawing
room.
In the dining room he was met by Konstantin Levin.
‘I’m not late?’
‘You can never help being late!’ said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, taking his arm.
‘Have you a lot of people? Who’s here?’ asked Levin,
unable to help blushing, as he knocked the snow off his
cap with his glove.
‘All our own set. Kitty’s here. Come along, I’ll
introduce you to Karenin.’
Stepan Arkadyevitch, for all his liberal views, was well
aware that to meet Karenin was sure to be felt a flattering
distinction, and so treated his best friends to this honor.
But at that instant Konstantin Levin was not in a condition
to feel all the gratification of making such an acquaintance.
He had not seen Kitty since that memorable evening
when he met Vronsky, not counting, that is, the moment
Anna Karenina
836 of 1759
when he had had a glimpse of her on the highroad. He
had known at the bottom of his heart that he would see
her here today. But to keep his thoughts free, he had tried
to persuade himself that he did not know it. Now when
he heard that she was here, he was suddenly conscious of
such delight, and at the same time of such dread, that his
breath failed him and he could not utter what he wanted
to say.
‘What is she like, what is she like? Like what she used
to be, or like what she was in the carriage? What if Darya
Alexandrovna told the truth? Why shouldn’t it be the
truth?’ he thought.
‘Oh, please, introduce me to Karenin,’ he brought out
with an effort, and with a desperately determined step he
walked into the drawing room and beheld her.
She was not the same as she used to be, nor was she as
she had been in the carriage; she was quite different.
She was scared, shy, shame-faced, and still more
charming from it. She saw him the very instant he walked
into the room. She had been expecting him. She was
delighted, and so confused at her own delight that there
was a moment, the moment when he went up to her sister
and glanced again at her, when she, and he, and Dolly,
who saw it all, thought she would break down and would
Anna Karenina
837 of 1759
begin to cry. She crimsoned, turned white, crimsoned
again, and grew faint, waiting with quivering lips for him
to come to her. He went up to her, bowed, and held out
his hand without speaking. Except for the slight quiver of
her lips and the moisture in her eyes that made them
brighter, her smile was almost calm as she said:
‘How long it is since we’ve seen each other!’ and with
desperate determination she pressed his hand with her cold
hand.
‘You’ve not seen me, but I’ve seen you,’ said Levin,
with a radiant smile of happiness. ‘I saw you when you
were driving from the railway station to Ergushovo.’
‘When?’ she asked, wondering.
‘You were driving to Ergushovo,’ said Levin, feeling as
if he would sob with the rapture that was flooding his
heart. ‘And how dared I associate a thought of anything
not innocent with this touching creature? And, yes, I do
believe it’s true what Darya Alexandrovna told me,’ he
thought.
Stepan Arkadyevitch took him by the arm and led him
away to Karenin.
‘Let me introduce you.’ He mentioned their names.
‘Very glad to meet you again,’ said Alexey
Alexandrovitch coldly, shaking hands with Levin.
Anna Karenina
838 of 1759
‘You are acquainted?’ Stepan Arkadyevitch asked in
surprise.
‘We spent three hours together in the train,’ said Levin
smiling, ‘but got out, just as in a masquerade, quite
mystified—at least I was.’
‘Nonsense! Come along, please,’ said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, pointing in the direction of the dining
room.
The men went into the dining-room and went up to a
table, laid with six sorts of spirits and as many kinds of
cheese, some with little silver spades and some without,
caviar, herrings, preserves of various kinds, and plates with
slices of French bread.
The men stood round the strong-smelling spirits and
salt delicacies, and the discussion of the Russification of
Poland between Koznishev, Karenin, and Pestsov died
down in anticipation of dinner.
Sergey Ivanovitch was unequaled in his skill in winding
up the most heated and serious argument by some
unexpected pinch of Attic salt that changed the disposition
of his opponent. He did this now.
Alexey Alexandrovitch had been maintaining that the
Russification of Poland could only be accomplished as a
Anna Karenina
839 of 1759
result of larger measures which ought to be introduced by
the Russian government.
Pestsov insisted that one country can only absorb
another when it is the more densely populated.
Koznishev admitted both points, but with limitations.
As they were going out of the drawing room to conclude
the argument, Koznishev said, smiling:
‘So, then, for the Russification of our foreign
populations there is but one method—to bring up as many
children as one can. My brother and I are terribly in fault,
I see. You married men, especially you, Stepan
Arkadyevitch, are the real patriots: what number have you
reached?’ he said, smiling genially at their host and holding
out a tiny wine glass to him.
Everyone laughed, and Stepan Arkadyevitch with
particular good humor.
‘Oh, yes, that’s the best method!’ he said, munching
cheese and filling the wine-glass with a special sort of
spirit. The conversation dropped at the jest.
‘This cheese is not bad. Shall I give you some?’ said the
master of the house. ‘Why, have you been going in for
gymnastics again?’ he asked Levin, pinching his muscle
with his left hand. Levin smiled, bent his arm, and under
Stepan Arkadyevitch’s fingers the muscles swelled up like a
Anna Karenina
840 of 1759
sound cheese, hard as a knob of iron, through the fine
cloth of the coat.
‘What biceps! A perfect Samson!’
‘I imagine great strength is needed for hunting bears,’
observed Alexey Alexandrovitch, who had the mistiest
notions about the chase. He cut off and spread with cheese
a wafer of bread fine as a spider-web.
Levin smiled.
‘Not at all. Quite the contrary; a child can kill a bear,’
he said, with a slight bow moving aside for the ladies, who
were approaching the table.
‘You have killed a bear, I’ve been told!’ said Kitty,
trying assiduously to catch with her fork a perverse
mushroom that would slip away, and setting the lace
quivering over her white arm. ‘Are there bears on your
place?’ she added, turning her charming little head to him
and smiling.
There was apparently nothing extraordinary in what
she said, but what unutterable meaning there was for him
in every sound, in every turn of her lips, her eyes, her
hand as she said it! There was entreaty for forgiveness, and
trust in him, and tenderness— soft, timid tenderness—and
promise and hope and love for him, which he could not
but believe in and which choked him with happiness.
Anna Karenina
841 of 1759
‘No, we’ve been hunting in the Tver province. It was
coming back from there that I met your beau-frere in the
train, or your beau-frere’s brother-in-law,’ he said with a
smile. ‘It was an amusing meeting.’
And he began telling with droll good-humor how, after
not sleeping all night, he had, wearing an old fur-lined,
full-skirted coat, got into Alexey Alexandrovitch’s
compartment.
‘The conductor, forgetting the proverb, would have
chucked me out on account of my attire; but thereupon I
began expressing my feelings in elevated language,
and...you, too,’ he said, addressing Karenin and forgetting
his name, ‘at first would have ejected me on the ground of
the old coat, but afterwards you took my part, for which I
am extremely grateful.’
‘The rights of passengers generally to choose their seats
are too ill-defined,’ said Alexey Alexandrovitch, rubbing
the tips of his fingers on his handkerchief.
‘I saw you were in uncertainty about me,’ said Levin,
smiling good-naturedly, ‘but I made haste to plunge into
intellectual conversation to smooth over the defects of my
attire.’ Sergey Ivanovitch, while he kept up a conversation
with their hostess, had one ear for his brother, and he
glanced askance at him. ‘What is the matter with him
Anna Karenina
842 of 1759
today? Why such a conquering hero?’ he thought. He did
not know that Levin was feeling as though he had grown
wings. Levin knew she was listening to his words and that
she was glad to listen to him. And this was the only thing
that interested him. Not in that room only, but in the
whole world, there existed for him only himself, with
enormously increased importance and dignity in his own
eyes, and she. He felt himself on a pinnacle that made him
giddy, and far away down below were all those nice
excellent Karenins, Oblonskys, and all the world.
Quite without attracting notice, without glancing at
them, as though there were no other places left, Stepan
Arkadyevitch put Levin and Kitty side by side.
‘Oh, you may as well sit there,’ he said to Levin.
The dinner was as choice as the china, in which Stepan
Arkadyevitch was a connoisseur. The soupe Marie-Louise
was a splendid success; the tiny pies eaten with it melted in
the mouth and were irreproachable. The two footmen and
Matvey, in white cravats, did their duty with the dishes
and wines unobtrusively, quietly, and swiftly. On the
material side the dinner was a success; it was no less so on
the immaterial. The conversation, at times general and at
times between individuals, never paused, and towards the
end the company was so lively that the men rose from the
Anna Karenina
843 of 1759
table, without stopping speaking, and even Alexey
Alexandrovitch thawed.
Anna Karenina
844 of 1759
Chapter 10
Pestsov liked thrashing an argument out to the end, and
was not satisfied with Sergey Ivanovitch’s words, especially
as he felt the injustice of his view.
‘I did not mean,’ he said over the soup, addressing
Alexey Alexandrovitch, ‘mere density of population alone,
but in conjunction with fundamental ideas, and not by
means of principles.’
‘It seems to me,’ Alexey Alexandrovitch said languidly,
and with no haste, ‘that that’s the same thing. In my
opinion, influence over another people is only possible to
the people which has the higher development, which..’
‘But that’s just the question,’ Pestsov broke in in his
bass.
He was always in a hurry to speak, and seemed always
to put his whole soul into what he was saying. ‘In what
are we to make higher development consist? The English,
the French, the Germans, which is at the highest stage of
development? Which of them will nationalize the other?
We see the Rhine provinces have been turned French, but
the Germans are not at a lower stage!’ he shouted. ‘There
is another law at work there.’
Anna Karenina
845 of 1759
‘I fancy that the greater influence is always on the side
of true civilization,’ said Alexey Alexandrovitch, slightly
lifting his eyebrows.
‘But what are we to lay down as the outward signs of
true civilization?’ said Pestsov.
‘I imagine such signs are generally very well known,’
said Alexey Alexandrovitch.
‘But are they fully known?’ Sergey Ivanovitch put in
with a subtle smile. ‘It is the accepted view now that real
culture must be purely classical; but we see most intense
disputes on each side of the question, and there is no
denying that the opposite camp has strong points in its
favor.’
‘You are for classics, Sergey Ivanovitch. Will you take
red wine?’ said Stepan Arkadyevitch.
‘I am not expressing my own opinion of either form of
culture,’ Sergey Ivanovitch said, holding out his glass with
a smile of condescension, as to a child. ‘I only say that
both sides have strong arguments to support them,’ he
went on, addressing Alexey Alexandrovitch. ‘My
sympathies are classical from education, but in this
discussion I am personally unable to arrive at a conclusion.
I see no distinct grounds for classical studies being given a
preeminence over scientific studies.’
Anna Karenina
846 of 1759
‘The natural sciences have just as great an educational
value,’ put in Pestsov. ‘Take astronomy, take botany, or
zoology with its system of general principles.’
‘I cannot quite agree with that,’ responded Alexey
Alexandrovitch ‘It seems to me that one must admit that
the very process of studying the forms of language has a
peculiarly favorable influence on intellectual development.
Moreover, it cannot be denied that the influence of the
classical authors is in the highest degree moral, while,
unfortunately, with the study of the natural sciences are
associated the false and noxious doctrines which are the
curse of our day.’
Sergey Ivanovitch would have said something, but
Pestsov interrupted him in his rich bass. He began warmly
contesting the justice of this view. Sergey Ivanovitch
waited serenely to speak, obviously with a convincing
reply ready.
‘But,’ said Sergey Ivanovitch, smiling subtly, and
addressing Karenin, ‘One must allow that to weigh all the
advantages and disadvantages of classical and scientific
studies is a difficult task, and the question which form of
education was to be preferred would not have been so
quickly and conclusively decided if there had not been in
Anna Karenina
847 of 1759
favor of classical education, as you expressed it just now,
its moral—disons le mot—anti-nihilist influence.’
‘Undoubtedly.’
‘If it had not been for the distinctive property of antinihilistic influence on the side of classical studies, we
should have considered the subject more, have weighed
the arguments on both sides,’ said Sergey Ivanovitch with
a subtle smile, ‘we should have given elbow-room to both
tendencies. But now we know that these little pills of
classical learning possess the medicinal property of antinihilism, and we boldly prescribe them to our patients....
But what if they had no such medicinal property?’ he
wound up humorously.
At Sergey Ivanovitch’s little pills, everyone laughed;
Turovtsin in especial roared loudly and jovially, glad at last
to have found something to laugh at, all he ever looked
for in listening to conversation.
Stepan Arkadyevitch had not made a mistake in
inviting Pestsov. With Pestsov intellectual conversation
never flagged for an instant. Directly Sergey Ivanovitch
had concluded the conversation with his jest, Pestsov
promptly started a new one.
‘I can’t agree even,’ said he, ‘that the government had
that aim. The government obviously is guided by abstract
Anna Karenina
848 of 1759
considerations, and remains indifferent to the influence its
measures may exercise. The education of women, for
instance, would naturally be regarded as likely to be
harmful, but the government opens schools and
universities for women.’
And the conversation at once passed to the new subject
of the education of women.
Alexey Alexandrovitch expressed the idea that the
education of women is apt to be confounded with the
emancipation of women, and that it is only so that it can
be considered dangerous.
‘I consider, on the contrary, that the two questions are
inseparably connected together,’ said Pestsov; ‘it is a
vicious circle. Woman is deprived of rights from lack of
education, and the lack of education results from the
absence of rights. We must not forget that the subjection
of women is so complete, and dates from such ages back
that we are often unwilling to recognize the gulf that
separates them from us,’ said he.
‘You said rights,’ said Sergey Ivanovitch, waiting till
Pestsov had finished, ‘meaning the right of sitting on
juries, of voting, of presiding at official meetings, the right
of entering the civil service, of sitting in parliament..’
‘Undoubtedly.’
Anna Karenina
849 of 1759
‘But if women, as a rare exception, can occupy such
positions, it seems to me you are wrong in using the
expression ‘rights.’ It would be more correct to say duties.
Every man will agree that in doing the duty of a juryman,
a witness, a telegraph clerk, we feel we are performing
duties. And therefore it would be correct to say that
women are seeking duties, and quite legitimately. And one
can but sympathize with this desire to assist in the general
labor of man.’
‘Quite so,’ Alexey Alexandrovitch assented. ‘The
question, I imagine, is simply whether they are fitted for
such duties.’
‘They will most likely be perfectly fitted,’ said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, ‘when education has become general
among them. We see this..’
‘How about the proverb?’ said the prince, who had a
long while been intent on the conversation, his little
comical eyes twinkling. ‘I can say it before my daughter:
her hair is long, because her wit is..’
‘Just what they thought of the negroes before their
emancipation!’ said Pestsov angrily.
‘What seems strange to me is that women should seek
fresh duties,’ said Sergey Ivanovitch, ‘while we see,
unhappily, that men usually try to avoid them.’
Anna Karenina
850 of 1759
‘Duties are bound up with rights—power, money,
honor; those are what women are seeking,’ said Pestsov.
‘Just as though I should seek the right to be a wet-nurse
and feel injured because women are paid for the work,
while no one will take me,’ said the old prince.
Turovtsin exploded in a loud roar of laughter and
Sergey Ivanovitch regretted that he had not made this
comparison. Even Alexey Alexandrovitch smiled.
‘Yes, but a man can’t nurse a baby,’ said Pestsov, ‘while
a woman..’
‘No, there was an Englishman who did suckle his baby
on board ship,’ said the old prince, feeling this freedom in
conversation permissible before his own daughters.
‘There are as many such Englishmen as there would be
women officials,’ said Sergey Ivanovitch.
‘Yes, but what is a girl to do who has no family?’ put in
Stepan Arkadyevitch, thinking of Masha Tchibisova,
whom he had had in his mind all along, in sympathizing
with Pestsov and supporting him.
‘If the story of such a girl were thoroughly sifted, you
would find she had abandoned a family—her own or a
sister’s, where she might have found a woman’s duties,’
Darya Alexandrovna broke in unexpectedly in a tone of
Anna Karenina
851 of 1759
exasperation, probably suspecting what sort of girl Stepan
Arkadyevitch was thinking of.
‘But we take our stand on principle as the ideal,’
replied Pestsov in his mellow bass. ‘Woman desires to
have rights, to be independent, educated. She is oppressed,
humiliated by the consciousness of her disabilities.’
‘And I’m oppressed and humiliated that they won’t
engage me at the Foundling,’ the old prince said again, to
the huge delight of Turovtsin, who in his mirth dropped
his asparagus with the thick end in the sauce.
Anna Karenina
852 of 1759
Chapter 11
Everyone took part in the conversation except Kitty
and Levin. At first, when they were talking of the
influence that one people has on another, there rose to
Levin’s mind what he had to say on the subject. But these
ideas, once of such importance in his eyes, seemed to
come into his brain as in a dream, and had now not the
slightest interest for him. It even struck him as strange that
they should be so eager to talk of what was of no use to
anyone. Kitty, too, should, one would have supposed,
have been interested in what they were saying of the rights
and education of women. How often she had mused on
the subject, thinking of her friend abroad, Varenka, of her
painful state of dependence, how often she had wondered
about herself what would become of her if she did not
marry, and how often she had argued with her sister about
it! But it did not interest her at all. She and Levin had a
conversation of their own, yet not a conversation, but
some sort of mysterious communication, which brought
them every moment nearer, and stirred in both a sense of
glad terror before the unknown into which they were
entering.
Anna Karenina
853 of 1759
At first Levin, in answer to Kitty’s question how he
could have seen her last year in the carriage, told her how
he had been coming home from the mowing along the
highroad and had met her.
‘It was very, very early in the morning. You were
probably only just awake. Your mother was asleep in the
corner. It was an exquisite morning. I was walking along
wondering who it could be in a four-in-hand? It was a
splendid set of four horses with bells, and in a second you
flashed by, and I saw you at the window—you were
sitting like this, holding the strings of your cap in both
hands, and thinking awfully deeply about something,’ he
said, smiling. ‘How I should like to know what you were
thinking about then! Something important?’
‘Wasn’t I dreadfully untidy?’ she wondered, but seeing
the smile of ecstasy these reminiscences called up, she felt
that the impression she had made had been very good. She
blushed and laughed with delight; ‘Really I don’t
remember.’
‘How nicely Turovtsin laughs!’ said Levin, admiring his
moist eyes and shaking chest.
‘Have you known him longs’ asked Kitty.
‘Oh, everyone knows him!’
‘And I see you think he’s a horrid man?’
Anna Karenina
854 of 1759
‘Not horrid, but nothing in him.’
‘Oh, you’re wrong! And you must give up thinking so
directly!’ said Kitty. ‘I used to have a very poor opinion of
him too, but he, he’s an awfully nice and wonderfully
good-hearted man. He has a heart of gold.’
‘How could you find out what sort of heart he has?’
‘We are great friends. I know him very well. Last
winter, soon after...you came to see us,’ she said, with a
guilty and at the same time confiding smile, ‘all Dolly’s
children had scarlet fever, and he happened to come and
see her. And only fancy,’ she said in a whisper, ‘he felt so
sorry for her that he stayed and began to help her look
after the children. Yes, and for three weeks he stopped
with them, and looked after the children like a nurse.’
‘I am telling Konstantin Dmitrievitch about Turovtsin
in the scarlet fever,’ she said, bending over to her sister.
‘Yes, it was wonderful, noble!’ said Dolly, glancing
towards Turovtsin, who had become aware they were
talking of him, and smiling gently to him. Levin glanced
once more at Turovtsin, and wondered how it was he had
not realized all this man’s goodness before.
‘I’m sorry, I’m sorry, and I’ll never think ill of people
again!’ he said gaily, genuinely expressing what he felt at
the moment.
Anna Karenina
855 of 1759
Chapter 12
Connected with the conversation that had sprung up
on the rights of women there were certain questions as to
the inequality of rights in marriage improper to discuss
before the ladies. Pestsov had several times during dinner
touched upon these questions, but Sergey Ivanovitch and
Stepan Arkadyevitch carefully drew him off them.
When they rose from the table and the ladies had gone
out, Pestsov did not follow them, but addressing Alexey
Alexandrovitch, began to expound the chief ground of
inequality. The inequality in marriage, in his opinion, lay
in the fact that the infidelity of the wife and infidelity of
the husband are punished unequally, both by the law and
by public opinion. Stepan Arkadyevitch went hurriedly up
to Alexey Alexandrovitch and offered him a cigar.
‘No, I don’t smoke,’ Alexey Alexandrovitch answered
calmly, and as though purposely wishing to show that he
was not afraid of the subject, he turned to Pestsov with a
chilly smile.
‘I imagine that such a view has a foundation in the very
nature of things,’ he said, and would have gone on to the
drawing room. But at this point Turovtsin broke suddenly
Anna Karenina
856 of 1759
and unexpectedly into the conversation, addressing Alexey
Alexandrovitch.
‘You heard, perhaps, about Pryatchnikov?’ said
Turovtsin, warmed up by the champagne he had drunk,
and long waiting for an opportunity to break the silence
that had weighed on him. ‘Vasya Pryatchnikov,’ he said,
with a good-natured smile on his damp, red lips,
addressing himself principally to the most important guest,
Alexey Alexandrovitch, ‘they told me today he fought a
duel with Kvitsky at Tver, and has killed him.’
Just as it always seems that one bruises oneself on a sore
place, so Stepan Arkadyevitch felt now that the
conversation would by ill luck fall every moment on
Alexey Alexandrovitch’s sore spot. He would again have
got his brother-in-law away, but Alexey Alexandrovitch
himself inquired, with curiosity:
‘What did Pryatchnikov fight about?’
‘His wife. Acted like a man, he did! Called him out and
shot him!’
‘Ah!’ said Alexey Alexandrovitch indifferently, and
lifting his eyebrows, he went into the drawing room.
‘How glad I am you have come,’ Dolly said with a
frightened smile, meeting him in the outer drawing room.
‘I must talk to you. Let’s sit here.’
Anna Karenina
857 of 1759
Alexey Alexandrovitch, with the same expression of
indifference, given him by his lifted eyebrows, sat down
beside Darya Alexandrovna, and smiled affectedly.
‘It’s fortunate,’ said he, ‘especially as I was meaning to
ask you to excuse me, and to be taking leave. I have to
start tomorrow.’
Darya Alexandrovna was firmly convinced of Anna’s
innocence, and she felt herself growing pale and her lips
quivering with anger at this frigid, unfeeling man, who
was so calmly intending to ruin her innocent friend.
‘Alexey Alexandrovitch,’ she said, with desperate
resolution looking him in the face, ‘I asked you about
Anna, you made me no answer. How is she?’
‘She is, I believe, quite well, Darya Alexandrovna,’
replied Alexey Alexandrovitch, not looking at her.
‘Alexey Alexandrovitch, forgive me, I have no
right...but I love Anna as a sister, and esteem her; I beg, I
beseech you to tell me what is wrong between you? what
fault do you find with her?’
Alexey Alexandrovitch frowned, and almost closing his
eyes, dropped his head.
‘I presume that your husband has told you the grounds
on which I consider it necessary to change my attitude to
Anna Arkadyevna?’ he said, not looking her in the face,
Anna Karenina
858 of 1759
but eyeing with displeasure Shtcherbatsky, who was
walking across the drawing room.
‘I don’t believe it, I don’t believe it, I can’t believe it!’
Dolly said, clasping her bony hands before her with a
vigorous gesture. She rose quickly, and laid her hand on
Alexey Alexandrovitch’s sleeve. ‘We shall be disturbed
here. Come this way, please.’
Dolly’s agitation had an effect on Alexey
Alexandrovitch. He got up and submissively followed her
to the schoolroom. They sat down to a table covered with
an oilcloth cut in slits by penknives.
‘I don’t, I don’t believe it!’ Dolly said, trying to catch
his glance that avoided her.
‘One cannot disbelieve facts, Darya Alexandrovna,’ said
he, with an emphasis on the word ‘facts.’
‘But what has she done?’ said Darya Alexandrovna.
‘What precisely has she done?’
‘She has forsaken her duty, and deceived her husband.
That’s what she has done,’ said he.
‘No, no, it can’t be! No, for God’s sake, you are
mistaken,’ said Dolly, putting her hands to her temples and
closing her eyes.
Alexey Alexandrovitch smiled coldly, with his lips
alone, meaning to signify to her and himself the firmness
Anna Karenina
859 of 1759
of his conviction; but this warm defense, though it could
not shake him, reopened his wound. He began to speak
with greater heat.
‘It is extremely difficult to be mistaken when a wife
herself informs her husband of the fact—informs him that
eight years of her life, and a son, all that’s a mistake, and
that she wants to begin life again,’ he said angrily, with a
snort.
‘Anna and sin—I cannot connect them, I cannot
believe it!’
‘Darya Alexandrovna,’ he said, now looking straight
into Dolly’s kindly, troubled face, and feeling that his
tongue was being loosened in spite of himself, ‘I would
give a great deal for doubt to be still possible. When I
doubted, I was miserable, but it was better than now.
When I doubted, I had hope; but now there is no hope,
and still I doubt of everything. I am in such
doubt of everything that I even hate my son, and
sometimes do not believe he is my son. I am very
unhappy.’
He had no need to say that. Darya Alexandrovna had
seen that as soon as he glanced into her face; and she felt
sorry for him, and her faith in the innocence of her friend
began to totter.
Anna Karenina
860 of 1759
‘Oh, this is awful, awful! But can it be true that you are
resolved on a divorce?’
‘I am resolved on extreme measures. There is nothing
else for me to do.’
‘Nothing else to do, nothing else to do...’ she replied,
with tears in her eyes. ‘Oh no, don’t say nothing else to
do!’ she said.
‘What is horrible in a trouble of this kind is that one
cannot, as in any other—in loss, in death—bear one’s
trouble in peace, but that one must act,’ said he, as though
guessing her thought. ‘One must get out of the
humiliating position in which one is placed; one can’t live
a trois.’
‘I understand, I quite understand that,’ said Dolly, and
her head sank. She was silent for a little, thinking of
herself, of her own grief in her family, and all at once,
with an impulsive movement, she raised her head and
clasped her hands with an imploring gesture. ‘But wait a
little! You are a Christian. Think of her! What will
become of her, if you cast her off?’
‘I have thought, Darya Alexandrovna, I have thought a
great deal,’ said Alexey Alexandrovitch. His face turned
red in patches, and his dim eyes looked straight before
him. Darya Alexandrovna at that moment pitied him with
Anna Karenina
861 of 1759
all her heart. ‘That was what I did indeed when she herself
made known to me my humiliation; I left everything as of
old. I gave her a chance to reform, I tried to save her. And
with what result? She would not regard the slightest
request—that she should observe decorum,’ he said,
getting heated. ‘One may save anyone who does not want
to be ruined; but if the whole nature is so corrupt, so
depraved, that ruin itself seems to be her salvation, what’s
to be done?’
‘Anything, only not divorce!’ answered Darya
Alexandrovna
‘But what is anything?’
‘No, it is awful! She will be no one’s wife, she will be
lost!’
‘What can I do?’ said Alexey Alexandrovitch, raising his
shoulders and his eyebrows. The recollection of his wife’s
last act had so incensed him that he had become frigid, as
at the beginning of the conversation. ‘I am very grateful
for your sympathy, but I must be going,’ he said, getting
up.
‘No, wait a minute. You must not ruin her. Wait a
little; I will tell you about myself. I was married, and my
husband deceived me; in anger and jealousy, I would have
thrown up everything, I would myself.... But I came to
Anna Karenina
862 of 1759
myself again; and who did it? Anna saved me. And here I
am living on. The children are growing up, my husband
has come back to his family, and feels his fault, is growing
purer, better, and I live on.... I have forgiven it, and you
ought to forgive!’
Alexey Alexandrovitch heard her, but her words had
no effect on him now. All the hatred of that day when he
had resolved on a divorce had sprung up again in his soul.
He shook himself, and said in a shrill, loud voice:
‘Forgive I cannot, and do not wish to, and I regard it as
wrong. I have done everything for this woman, and she
has trodden it all in the mud to which she is akin. I am not
a spiteful man, I have never hated anyone, but I hate her
with my whole soul, and I cannot even forgive her,
because I hate her too much for all the wrong she has
done me!’ he said, with tones of hatred in his voice.
‘Love those that hate you....’ Darya Alexandrovna
whispered timorously.
Alexey Alexandrovitch smiled contemptuously. That
he knew long ago, but it could not be applied to his case.
‘Love those that hate you, but to love those one hates is
impossible. Forgive me for having troubled you. Everyone
has enough to bear in his own grief!’ And regaining his
Anna Karenina
863 of 1759
self-possession, Alexey Alexandrovitch quietly took leave
and went away.
Anna Karenina
864 of 1759
Chapter 13
When they rose from table, Levin would have liked to
follow Kitty into the drawing room; but he was afraid she
might dislike this, as too obviously paying her attention.
He remained in the little ring of men, taking part in the
general conversation, and without looking at Kitty, he was
aware of her movements, her looks, and the place where
she was in the drawing room.
He did at once, and without the smallest effort, keep
the promise he had made her—always to think well of all
men, and to like everyone always. The conversation fell
on the village commune, in which Pestsov saw a sort of
special principle, called by him the choral principle. Levin
did not agree with Pestsov, nor with his brother, who had
a special attitude of his own, both admitting and not
admitting the significance of the Russian commune. But
he talked to them, simply trying to reconcile and soften
their differences. He was not in the least interested in what
he said himself, and even less so in what they said; all he
wanted was that they and everyone should be happy and
contented. He knew now the one thing of importance;
and that one thing was at first there, in the drawing room,
Anna Karenina
865 of 1759
and then began moving across and came to a standstill at
the door. Without turning round he felt the eyes fixed on
him, and the smile, and he could not help turning round.
She was standing in the doorway with Shtcherbatsky,
looking at him.
‘I thought you were going towards the piano,’ said he,
going up to her. ‘That’s something I miss in the country—
music.’
‘No; we only came to fetch you and thank you,’ she
said, rewarding him with a smile that was like a gift, ‘for
coming. What do they want to argue for? No one ever
convinces anyone, you know.’
‘Yes; that’s true,’ said Levin; ‘it generally happens that
one argues warmly simply because one can’t make out
what one’s opponent wants to prove.’
Levin had often noticed in discussions between the
most intelligent people that after enormous efforts, and an
enormous expenditure of logical subtleties and words, the
disputants finally arrived at being aware that what they had
so long been struggling to prove to one another had long
ago, from the beginning of the argument, been known to
both, but that they liked different things, and would not
define what they liked for fear of its being attacked. He
had often had the experience of suddenly in a discussion
Anna Karenina
866 of 1759
grasping what it was his opponent liked and at once liking
it too, and immediately he found himself agreeing, and
then all arguments fell away as useless. Sometimes, too, he
had experienced the opposite, expressing at last what he
liked himself, which he was devising arguments to defend,
and, chancing to express it well and genuinely, he had
found his opponent at once agreeing and ceasing to
dispute his position. He tried to say this.
she knitted her brow, trying to understand. But directly
he began to illustrate his meaning, she understood at once.
‘I know: one must find out what he is arguing for,
what is precious to him, then one can..’
She had completely guessed and expressed his badly
expressed idea. Levin smiled joyfully; he was struck by this
transition from the confused, verbose discussion with
Pestsov and his brother to this laconic, clear, almost
wordless communication of the most complex ideas.
Shtcherbatsky moved away from them, and Kitty,
going up to a card table, sat down, and, taking up the
chalk, began drawing diverging circles over the new green
cloth.
They began again on the subject that had been started
at dinner— the liberty and occupations of women. Levin
was of the opinion of Darya Alexandrovna that a girl who
Anna Karenina
867 of 1759
did not marry should find a woman’s duties in a family.
He supported this view by the fact that no family can get
on without women to help; that in every family, poor or
rich, there are and must be nurses, either relations or
hired.
‘No,’ said Kitty, blushing, but looking at him all the
more boldly with her truthful eyes; ‘a girl may be so
circumstanced that she cannot live in the family without
humiliation, while she herself..’
At the hint he understood her.
‘Oh, yes,’ he said. ‘Yes, yes, yes—you’re right; you’re
right!’
And he saw all that Pestsov had been maintaining at
dinner of the liberty of woman, simply from getting a
glimpse of the terror of an old maid’s existence and its
humiliation in Kitty’s heart; and loving her, he felt that
terror and humiliation, and at once gave up his arguments.
A silence followed. She was still drawing with the chalk
on the table. Her eyes were shining with a soft light.
Under the influence of her mood he felt in all his being a
continually growing tension of happiness.
‘Ah! I’ve scribbled all over the table!’ she said, and
laying down the chalk, she made a movement as though
to get up.
Anna Karenina
868 of 1759
‘What! shall I be left alone—without her?’ he thought
with horror, and he took the chalk. ‘Wait a minute,’ he
said, sitting down to the table. ‘I’ve long wanted to ask
you one thing.’
He looked straight into her caressing, though
frightened eyes.
‘Please, ask it.’
‘Here,’ he said; and he wrote the initial letters, w, y, t,
m, i, c, n, b, d, t, m, n, o, t. These letters meant, ‘When
you told me it could never be, did that mean never, or
then?’ There seemed no likelihood that she could make
out this complicated sentence; but he looked at her as
though his life depended on her understanding the words.
She glanced at him seriously, then leaned her puckered
brow on her hands and began to read. Once or twice she
stole a look at him, as though asking him, ‘Is it what I
think?’
‘I understand,’ she said, flushing a little.
‘What is this word?’ he said, pointing to the n that
stood for never.
‘It means NEVER,’ she said; ‘but that’s not true!’
He quickly rubbed out what he had written, gave her
the chalk, and stood up. She wrote, t, i, c, n, a, d.
Anna Karenina
869 of 1759
Dolly was completely comforted in the depression
caused by her conversation with Alexey Alexandrovitch
when she caught sight of the two figures: Kitty with the
chalk in her hand, with a shy and happy smile looking
upwards at Levin, and his handsome figure bending over
the table with glowing eyes fastened one minute on the
table and the next on her. He was suddenly radiant: he
had understood. It meant, ‘Then I could not answer
differently.’
He glanced at her questioningly, timidly.
‘Only then?’
‘Yes,’ her smile answered.
‘And n...and now?’ he asked.
‘Well, read this. I’ll tell you what I should like—should
like so much!’ she wrote the initial letters, i, y, c, f, a, f, w,
h. This meant, ‘If you could forget and forgive what
happened.’
He snatched the chalk with nervous, trembling fingers,
and breaking it, wrote the initial letters of the following
phrase, ‘I have nothing to forget and to forgive; I have
never ceased to love you.’
She glanced at him with a smile that did not waver.
‘I understand,’ she said in a whisper.
Anna Karenina
870 of 1759
He sat down and wrote a long phrase. She understood
it all, and without asking him, ‘Is it this?’ took the chalk
and at once answered.
For a long while he could not understand what she had
written, and often looked into her eyes. He was stupefied
with happiness. He could not supply the word she had
meant; but in her charming eyes, beaming with happiness,
he saw all he needed to know. And he wrote three letters.
But he had hardly finished writing when she read them
over her arm, and herself finished and wrote the answer,
‘Yes.’
‘You’re playing secretaire?’ said the old prince. ‘But we
must really be getting along if you want to be in time at
the theater.’
Levin got up and escorted Kitty to the door.
In their conversation everything had been said; it had
been said that she loved him, and that she would tell her
father and mother that he would come tomorrow
morning.
Anna Karenina
871 of 1759
Chapter 14
When Kitty had gone and Levin was left alone, he felt
such uneasiness without her and such an impatient longing
to get as quickly, as quickly as possible, to tomorrow
morning, when he would see her again and be plighted to
her forever, that he felt afraid, as though of death, of those
fourteen hours that he had to get through without her. It
was essential for him to be with someone to talk to, so as
not to be left alone, to kill time. Stepan Arkadyevitch
would have been the companion most congenial to him,
but he was going out, he said, to a soiree, in reality to the
ballet. Levin only had time to tell him he was happy, and
that he loved him, and would never, never forget what he
had done for him. The eyes and the smile of Stepan
Arkadyevitch showed Levin that he comprehended that
feeling fittingly.
‘Oh, so it’s not time to die yet?’ said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, pressing Levin’s hand with emotion.
‘N-n-no!’ said Levin.
Darya Alexandrovna too, as she said good-bye to him,
gave him a sort of congratulation, saying, ‘How glad I am
you have met Kitty again! One must value old friends.’
Anna Karenina
872 of 1759
Levin did not like these words of Darya Alexandrovna’s.
She could not understand how lofty and beyond her it all
was, and she ought not to have dared to allude to it. Levin
said good-bye to them, but, not to be left alone, he
attached himself to his brother.
‘Where are you going?’
‘I’m going to a meeting.’
‘Well, I’ll come with you. May I?’
‘What for? Yes, come along,’ said Sergey Ivanovitch,
smiling. ‘What is the matter with you today?’
‘With me? Happiness is the matter with me!’ said
Levin, letting down the window of the carriage they were
driving in. ‘You don’t mind?—it’s so stifling. It’s happiness
is the matter with me! Why is it you have never married?’
Sergey Ivanovitch smiled.
‘I am very glad, she seems a nice gi...’ Sergey
Ivanovitch was beginning.
‘Don’t say it! don’t say it!’ shouted Levin, clutching at
the collar of his fur coat with both hands, and muffling
him up in it. ‘She’s a nice girl’ were such simple, humble
words, so out of harmony with his feeling.
Sergey Ivanovitch laughed outright a merry laugh,
which was rare with him. ‘Well, anyway, I may say that
I’m very glad of it.’
Anna Karenina
873 of 1759
‘That you may do tomorrow, tomorrow and nothing
more! Nothing, nothing, silence,’ said Levin, and muffing
him once more in his fur coat, he added: ‘I do like you so!
Well, is it possible for me to be present at the meeting?’
‘Of course it is.’
‘What is your discussion about today?’ asked Levin,
never ceasing smiling.
They arrived at the meeting. Levin heard the secretary
hesitatingly read the minutes which he obviously did not
himself understand; but Levin saw from this secretary’s
face what a good, nice, kind-hearted person he was. This
was evident from his confusion and embarrassment in
reading the minutes. Then the discussion began. They
were disputing about the misappropriation of certain sums
and the laying of certain pipes, and Sergey Ivanovitch was
very cutting to two members, and said something at great
length with an air of triumph; and another member,
scribbling something on a bit of paper, began timidly at
first, but afterwards answered him very viciously and
delightfully. And then Sviazhsky (he was there too) said
something too, very handsomely and nobly. Levin listened
to them, and saw clearly that these missing sums and these
pipes were not anything real, and that they were not at all
angry, but were all the nicest, kindest people, and
Anna Karenina
874 of 1759
everything was as happy and charming as possible among
them. They did no harm to anyone, and were all enjoying
it. What struck Levin was that he could see through them
all today, and from little, almost imperceptible signs knew
the soul of each, and saw distinctly that they were all good
at heart. And Levin himself in particular they were all
extremely fond of that day. That was evident from the
way they spoke to him, from the friendly, affectionate way
even those he did not know looked at him.
‘Well, did you like it?’ Sergey Ivanovitch asked him.
‘Very much. I never supposed it was so interesting!
Capital! Splendid!’
Sviazhsky went up to Levin and invited him to come
round to tea with him. Levin was utterly at a loss to
comprehend or recall what it was he had disliked in
Sviazhsky, what he had failed to find in him. He was a
clever and wonderfully good-hearted man.
‘Most delighted,’ he said, and asked after his wife and
sister-in-law. And from a queer association of ideas,
because in his imagination the idea of Sviazhsky’s sister-inlaw was connected with marriage, it occurred to him that
there was no one to whom he could more suitably speak
of his happiness, and he was very glad to go and see them.
Anna Karenina
875 of 1759
Sviazhsky questioned him about his improvements on
his estate, presupposing, as he always did, that there was
no possibility of doing anything not done already in
Europe, and now this did not in the least annoy Levin. On
the contrary, he felt that Sviazhsky was right, that the
whole business was of little value, and he saw the
wonderful softness and consideration with which
Sviazhsky avoided fully expressing his correct view. The
ladies of the Sviazhsky household were particularly
delightful. It seemed to Levin that they knew all about it
already and sympathized with him, saying nothing merely
from delicacy. He stayed with them one hour, two, three,
talking of all sorts of subjects but the one thing that filled
his heart, and did not observe that he was boring them
dreadfully, and that it was long past their bedtime.
Sviazhsky went with him into the hall, yawning and
wondering at the strange humor his friend was in. It was
past one o’clock. Levin went back to his hotel, and was
dismayed at the thought that all alone now with his
impatience he had ten hours still left to get through. The
servant, whose turn it was to be up all night, lighted his
candles, and would have gone away, but Levin stopped
him. This servant, Yegor, whom Levin had noticed
Anna Karenina
876 of 1759
before, struck him as a very intelligent, excellent, and,
above all, good-hearted man.
‘Well, Yegor, it’s hard work not sleeping, isn’t it?’
‘One’s got to put up with it! It’s part of our work, you
see. In a gentleman’s house it’s easier; but then here one
makes more.’
It appeared that Yegor had a family, three boys and a
daughter, a sempstress, whom he wanted to marry to a
cashier in a saddler’s shop.
Levin, on hearing this, informed Yegor that, in his
opinion, in marriage the great thing was love, and that
with love one would always be happy, for happiness rests
only on oneself. Yegor listened attentively, and obviously
quite took in Levin’s idea, but by way of assent to it he
enunciated, greatly to Levin’s surprise, the observation that
when he had lived with good masters he had always been
satisfied with his masters, and now was perfectly satisfied
with his employer, though he was a Frenchman.
‘Wonderfully good-hearted fellow!’ thought Levin.
‘Well, but you yourself, Yegor, when you got married,
did you love your wife?’
‘Ay! and why not?’ responded Yegor.
And Levin saw that Yegor too was in an excited state
and intending to express all his most heartfelt emotions.
Anna Karenina
877 of 1759
‘My life, too, has been a wonderful one. From a child
up...’ he was beginning with flashing eyes, apparently
catching Levin’s enthusiasm, just as people catch yawning.
But at that moment a ring was heard. Yegor departed,
and Levin was left alone. He had eaten scarcely anything
at dinner, had refused tea and supper at Sviazhsky’s, but he
was incapable of thinking of supper. He had not slept the
previous night, but was incapable of thinking of sleep
either. His room was cold, but he was oppressed by heat.
He opened both the movable panes in his window and sat
down to the table opposite the open panes. Over the
snow-covered roofs could be seen a decorated cross with
chains, and above it the rising triangle of Charles’s Wain
with the yellowish light of Capella. He gazed at the cross,
then at the stars, drank in the fresh freezing air that flowed
evenly into the room, and followed as though in a dream
the images and memories that rose in his imagination. At
four o’clock he heard steps in the passage and peeped out
at the door. It was the gambler Myaskin, whom he knew,
coming from the club. He walked gloomily, frowning and
coughing. ‘Poor, unlucky fellow!’ thought Levin, and tears
came into his eyes from love and pity for this man. He
would have talked with him, and tried to comfort him,
but remembering that he had nothing but his shirt on, he
Anna Karenina
878 of 1759
changed his mind and sat down again at the open pane to
bathe in the cold air and gaze at the exquisite lines of the
cross, silent, but full of meaning for him, and the
mounting lurid yellow star. At seven o’clock there was a
noise of people polishing the floors, and bells ringing in
some servants’ department, and Levin felt that he was
beginning to get frozen. He closed the pane, washed,
dressed, and went out into the street.
Anna Karenina
879 of 1759
Chapter 15
The streets were still empty. Levin went to the house
of the Shtcherbatskys. The visitors’ doors were closed and
everything was asleep. He walked back, went into his
room again, and asked for coffee. The day servant, not
Yegor this time, brought it to him. Levin would have
entered into conversation with him, but a bell rang for the
servant, and he went out. Levin tried to drink coffee and
put some roll in his mouth, but his mouth was quite at a
loss what to do with the roll. Levin, rejecting the roll, put
on his coat and went out again for a walk. It was nine
o’clock when he reached the Shtcherbatskys’ steps the
second time. In the house they were only just up, and the
cook came out to go marketing. He had to get through at
least two hours more.
All that night and morning Levin lived perfectly
unconsciously, and felt perfectly lifted out of the
conditions of material life. He had eaten nothing for a
whole day, he had not slept for two nights, had spent
several hours undressed in the frozen air, and felt not
simply fresher and stronger than ever, but felt utterly
independent of his body; he moved without muscular
Anna Karenina
880 of 1759
effort, and felt as if he could do anything. He was
convinced he could fly upwards or lift the corner of the
house, if need be. He spent the remainder of the time in
the street, incessantly looking at his watch and gazing
about him.
And what he saw then, he never saw again after. The
children especially going to school, the bluish doves flying
down from the roofs to the pavement, and the little loaves
covered with flour, thrust out by an unseen hand, touched
him. Those loaves, those doves, and those two boys were
not earthly creatures. It all happened at the same time: a
boy ran towards a dove and glanced smiling at Levin; the
dove, with a whir of her wings, darted away, flashing in
the sun, amid grains of snow that quivered in the air,
while from a little window there came a smell of freshbaked bread, and the loaves were put out. All of this
together was so extraordinarily nice that Levin laughed
and cried with delight. Going a long way round by
Gazetny Place and Kislovka, he went back again to the
hotel, and putting his watch before him, he sat down to
wait for twelve o’clock. In the next room they were
talking about some sort of machines, and swindling, and
coughing their morning coughs. They did not realize that
the hand was near twelve. The hand reached it. Levin
Anna Karenina
881 of 1759
went out onto the steps. The sledge-drivers clearly knew
all about it. They crowded round Levin with happy faces,
quarreling among themselves, and offering their services.
Trying not to offend the other sledge drivers, and
promising to drive with them too, Levin took one and
told him to drive to the Shtcherbatskys’. The sledge-driver
was splendid in a white shirt-collar sticking out over his
overcoat and into his strong, full-blooded red neck. The
sledge was high and comfortable, and altogether such a
one as Levin never drove in after, and the horse was a
good one, and tried to gallop but didn’t seem to move.
The driver knew the Shtcherbatskys’ house, and drew up
at the entrance with a curve of his arm and a ‘Wo!’
especially indicative of respect for his fare. The
Shtcherbatskys’ hall-porter certainly knew all about it.
This was evident from the smile in his eyes and the way
he said:
‘Well, it’s a long while since you’ve been to see us,
Konstantin Demitrievitch!’
Not only he knew all about it, but he was unmistakably
delighted and making efforts to conceal his joy. Looking
into his kindly old eyes, Levin realized even something
new in his happiness.
‘Are they up?’
Anna Karenina
882 of 1759
‘Pray walk in! Leave it here,’ said he, smiling, as Levin
would have come back to take his hat. That meant
something.
‘To whom shall I announce your honor?’ asked the
footman.
The footman, though a young man, and one of the
new school of footmen, a dandy, was a very kind-hearted,
good fellow, and he too knew all about it.
‘The princess...the prince...the young princess...’ said
Levin.
The first person he saw was Mademoiselle Linon. She
walked across the room, and her ringlets and her face were
beaming. He had only just spoken to her, when suddenly
he heard the rustle of a skirt at the door, and
Mademoiselle Linon vanished from Levin’s eyes, and a
joyful terror came over him at the nearness of his
happiness. Mademoiselle Linon was in great haste, and
leaving him, went out at the other door. Directly she had
gone out, swift, swift light steps sounded on the parquet,
and his bliss, his life, himself—what was best in himself,
what he had so long sought and longed for—was quickly,
so quickly approaching him. She did not walk, but
seemed, by some unseen force, to float to him. He saw
nothing but her clear, truthful eyes, frightened by the same
Anna Karenina
883 of 1759
bliss of love that flooded his heart. Those eyes were
shining nearer and nearer, blinding him with their light of
love. She stopped still close to him, touching him. Her
hands rose and dropped onto his shoulders.
She had done all she could—she had run up to him and
given herself up entirely, shy and happy. He put his arms
round her and pressed his lips to her mouth that sought his
kiss.
She too had not slept all night, and had been expecting
him all the morning.
Her mother and father had consented without demur,
and were happy in her happiness. She had been waiting
for him. She wanted to be the first to tell him her
happiness and his. She had got ready to see him alone, and
had been delighted at the idea, and had been shy and
ashamed, and did not know herself what she was doing.
She had heard his steps and voice, and had waited at the
door for Mademoiselle Linon to go. Mademoiselle Linon
had gone away. Without thinking, without asking herself
how and what, she had gone up to him, and did as she was
doing.
‘Let us go to mamma!’ she said, taking him by the
hand. For a long while he could say nothing, not so much
because he was afraid of desecrating the loftiness of his
Anna Karenina
884 of 1759
emotion by a word, as that every time he tried to say
something, instead of words he felt that tears of happiness
were welling up. He took her hand and kissed it.
‘Can it be true?’ he said at last in a choked voice. ‘I
can’t believe you love me, dear!’
She smiled at that ‘dear,’ and at the timidity with which
he glanced at her.
‘Yes!’ she said significantly, deliberately. ‘I am so
happy!’
Not letting go his hands, she went into the drawing
room. The princess, seeing them, breathed quickly, and
immediately began to cry and then immediately began to
laugh and with a vigorous step Levin had not expected,
ran up to him, and hugging his head, kissed him, wetting
his cheeks with her tears.
‘So it is all settled! I am glad. Love her. I am glad....
Kitty!’
‘You’ve not been long settling things,’ said the old
prince, trying to seem unmoved; but Levin noticed that
his eyes were wet when he turned to him.
‘I’ve long, always wished for this!’ said the prince,
taking Levin by the arm and drawing him towards himself.
‘Even when this little feather-head fancied..’
Anna Karenina
885 of 1759
‘Papa!’ shrieked Kitty, and shut his mouth with her
hands.
‘Well, I won’t!’ he said. ‘I’m very, very ...plea ...Oh,
what a fool I am..’
He embraced Kitty, kissed her face, her hand, her face
again and made the sign of the cross over her.
And there came over Levin a new feeling of love for
this man, till then so little known to him, when he saw
how slowly and tenderly Kitty kissed his muscular hand.
Anna Karenina
886 of 1759
Chapter 16
The princess sat in her armchair, silent and smiling; the
prince sat down beside her. Kitty stood by her father’s
chair, still holding his hand. All were silent.
The princess was the first to put everything into words,
and to translate all thoughts and feelings into practical
questions. And all equally felt this strange and painful for
the first minute.
‘When is it to be? We must have the benediction and
announcement. And when’s the wedding to be? What do
you think, Alexander?’
‘Here he is,’ said the old prince, pointing to Levin—
‘he’s the principal person in the matter.’
‘When?’ said Levin blushing. ‘Tomorrow; If you ask
me, I should say, the benediction today and the wedding
tomorrow.’
‘Come, mon cher, that’s nonsense!’
‘Well, in a week.’
‘He’s quite mad.’
‘No, why so?’
‘Well, upon my word!’ said the mother, smiling,
delighted at this haste. ‘How about the trousseau?’
Anna Karenina
887 of 1759
‘Will there really be a trousseau and all that?’ Levin
thought with horror. ‘But can the trousseau and the
benediction and all that—can it spoil my happiness?
Nothing can spoil it!’ He glanced at Kitty, and noticed
that she was not in the least, not in the very least,
disturbed by the idea of the trousseau. ‘Then it must be all
right,’ he thought.
‘Oh, I know nothing about it; I only said what I should
like,’ he said apologetically.
‘We’ll talk it over, then. The benediction and
announcement can take place now. That’s very well.’
The princess went up to her husband, kissed him, and
would have gone away, but he kept her, embraced her,
and tenderly as a young lover, kissed her several times,
smiling. The old people were obviously muddled for a
moment, and did not quite know whether it was they
who were in love again or their daughter. When the
prince and the princess had gone, Levin went up to his
betrothed and took her hand. He was self-possessed now
and could speak, and he had a great deal he wanted to tell
her. But he said not at all what he had to say.
‘How I knew it would be so! I never hoped for it; and
yet in my heart I was always sure,’ he said. ‘I believe that it
was ordained.’
Anna Karenina
888 of 1759
‘And I!’ she said. ‘Even when....’ She stopped and went
on again, looking at him resolutely with her truthful eyes,
‘Even when I thrust from me my happiness. I always loved
you alone, but I was carried away. I ought to tell you....
Can you forgive that?’
‘Perhaps it was for the best. You will have to forgive
me so much. I ought to tell you..’
This was one of the things he had meant to speak
about. He had resolved from the first to tell her two
things—that he was not chaste as she was, and that he was
not a believer. It was agonizing, but he considered he
ought to tell her both these facts.
‘No, not now, later!’ he said.
‘Very well, later, but you must certainly tell me. I’m
not afraid of anything. I want to know everything. Now it
is settled.’
He added: ‘Settled that you’ll take me whatever I may
be—you won’t give me up? Yes?’
‘Yes, yes.’
Their conversation was interrupted by Mademoiselle
Linon, who with an affected but tender smile came to
congratulate her favorite pupil. Before she had gone, the
servants came in with their congratulations. Then relations
arrived, and there began that state of blissful absurdity
Anna Karenina
889 of 1759
from which Levin did not emerge till the day after his
wedding. Levin was in a continual state of awkwardness
and discomfort, but the intensity of his happiness went on
all the while increasing. He felt continually that a great
deal was being expected of him—what, he did not know;
and he did everything he was told, and it all gave him
happiness. He had thought his engagement would have
nothing about it like others, that the ordinary conditions
of engaged couples would spoil his special happiness; but it
ended in his doing exactly as other people did, and his
happiness being only increased thereby and becoming
more and more special, more and more unlike anything
that had ever happened.
‘Now we shall have sweetmeats to eat,’ said
Mademoiselle Linon— and Levin drove off to buy
sweetmeats.
‘Well, I’m very glad,’ said Sviazhsky. ‘I advise you to
get the bouquets from Fomin’s.’
‘Oh, are they wanted?’ And he drove to Fomin’s.
His brother offered to lend him money, as he would
have so many expenses, presents to give....
‘Oh, are presents wanted?’ And he galloped to
Foulde’s.
Anna Karenina
890 of 1759
And at the confectioner’s, and at Fomin’s, and at
Foulde’s he saw that he was expected; that they were
pleased to see him, and prided themselves on his
happiness, just as every one whom he had to do with
during those days. What was extraordinary was that
everyone not only liked him, but even people previously
unsympathetic, cold, and callous, were enthusiastic over
him, gave way to him in everything, treated his feeling
with tenderness and delicacy, and shared his conviction
that he was the happiest man in the world because his
betrothed was beyond perfection. Kitty too felt the same
thing. When Countess Nordston ventured to hint that she
had hoped for something better, Kitty was so angry and
proved so conclusively that nothing in the world could be
better than Levin, that Countess Nordston had to admit it,
and in Kitty’s presence never met Levin without a smile of
ecstatic admiration.
The confession he had promised was the one painful
incident of this time. He consulted the old prince, and
with his sanction gave Kitty his diary, in which there was
written the confession that tortured him. He had written
this diary at the time with a view to his future wife. Two
things caused him anguish: his lack of purity and his lack
of faith. His confession of unbelief passed unnoticed. She
Anna Karenina
891 of 1759
was religious, had never doubted the truths of religion, but
his external unbelief did not affect her in the least.
Through love she knew all his soul, and in his soul she
saw what she wanted, and that such a state of soul should
be called unbelieving was to her a matter of no account.
The other confession set her weeping bitterly.
Levin, not without an inner struggle, handed her his
diary. He knew that between him and her there could not
be, and should not be, secrets, and so he had decided that
so it must be. But he had not realized what an effect it
would have on her, he had not put himself in her place. It
was only when the same evening he came to their house
before the theater, went into her room and saw her tearstained, pitiful, sweet face, miserable with suffering he had
caused and nothing could undo, he felt the abyss that
separated his shameful past from her dovelike purity, and
was appalled at what he had done.
‘Take them, take these dreadful books!’ she said,
pushing away the notebooks lying before her on the table.
‘Why did you give them me? No, it was better anyway,’
she added, touched by his despairing face. ‘But it’s awful,
awful!’
His head sank, and he was silent. He could say nothing.
‘You can’t forgive me,’ he whispered.
Anna Karenina
892 of 1759
‘Yes, I forgive you; but it’s terrible!’
But his happiness was so immense that this confession
did not shatter it, it only added another shade to it. She
forgave him; but from that time more than ever he
considered himself unworthy of her, morally bowed down
lower than ever before her, and prized more highly than
ever his undeserved happiness.
Anna Karenina
893 of 1759
Chapter 17
Unconsciously going over in his memory the
conversations that had taken place during and after dinner,
Alexey Alexandrovitch returned to his solitary room.
Darya Alexandrovna’s words about forgiveness had
aroused in him nothing but annoyance. The applicability
or non-applicability of the Christian precept to his own
case was too difficult a question to be discussed lightly, and
this question had long ago been answered by Alexey
Alexandrovitch in the negative. Of all that had been said,
what stuck most in his memory was the phrase of stupid,
good-natured Turovtsin—‘ACTED LIKE A MAN, HE
DID! CALLED HIM OUT AND SHOT HIM!’
Everyone had apparently shared this feeling, though from
politeness they had not expressed it.
‘But the matter is settled, it’s useless thinking about it,’
Alexey Alexandrovitch told himself. And thinking of
nothing but the journey before him, and the revision
work he had to do, he went into his room and asked the
porter who escorted him where his man was. The porter
said that the man had only just gone out. Alexey
Alexandrovitch ordered tea to be sent him, sat down to
Anna Karenina
894 of 1759
the table, and taking the guidebook, began considering the
route of his journey.
‘Two telegrams,’ said his manservant, coming into the
room. ‘I beg your pardon, your excellency; I’d only just
that minute gone out.’
Alexey Alexandrovitch took the telegrams and opened
them. The first telegram was the announcement of
Stremov’s appointment to the very post Karenin had
coveted. Alexey Alexandrovitch flung the telegram down,
and flushing a little, got up and began to pace up and
down the room. ‘Quos vult perdere dementat,’ he said,
meaning by quos the persons responsible for this
appointment. He was not so much annoyed that he had
not received the post, that he had been conspicuously
passed over; but it was incomprehensible, amazing to him
that they did not see that the wordy phrase-monger
Stremov was the last man fit for it. How could they fail to
see how they were ruining themselves, lowering their
prestige by this appointment?
‘Something else in the same line,’ he said to himself
bitterly, opening the second telegram. The telegram was
from his wife. Her name, written in blue pencil, ‘Anna,’
was the first thing that caught his eye. ‘I am dying; I beg, I
implore you to come. I shall die easier with your
Anna Karenina
895 of 1759
forgiveness,’ he read. He smiled contemptuously, and
flung down the telegram. That this was a trick and a fraud,
of that, he thought for the first minute, there could be no
doubt.
‘There is no deceit she would stick at. She was near her
confinement. Perhaps it is the confinement. But what can
be their aim? To legitimize the child, to compromise me,
and prevent a divorce,’ he thought. ‘But something was
said in it: I am dying....’ He read the telegram again, and
suddenly the plain meaning of what was said in it struck
him.
‘And if it is true?’ he said to himself. ‘If it is true that in
the moment of agony and nearness to death she is
genuinely penitent, and I, taking it for a trick, refuse to
go? That would not only be cruel, and everyone would
blame me, but it would be stupid on my part.’
‘Piotr, call a coach; I am going to Petersburg,’ he said
to his servant.
Alexey Alexandrovitch decided that he would go to
Petersburg and see his wife. If her illness was a trick, he
would say nothing and go away again. If she was really in
danger, and wished to see him before her death, he would
forgive her if he found her alive, and pay her the last
duties if he came too late.
Anna Karenina
896 of 1759
All the way he thought no more of what he ought to
do.
With a sense of weariness and uncleanness from the
night spent in the train, in the early fog of Petersburg
Alexey Alexandrovitch drove through the deserted
Nevsky and stared straight before him, not thinking of
what was awaiting him. He could not think about it,
because in picturing what would happen, he could not
drive away the reflection that her death would at once
remove all the difficulty of his position. Bakers, closed
shops, night-cabmen, porters sweeping the pavements
flashed past his eyes, and he watched it all, trying to
smother the thought of what was awaiting him, and what
he dared not hope for, and yet was hoping for. He drove
up to the steps. A sledge and a carriage with the coachman
asleep stood at the entrance. As he went into the entry,
Alexey Alexandrovitch, as it were, got out his resolution
from the remotest corner of his brain, and mastered it
thoroughly. Its meaning ran: ‘If it’s a trick, then calm
contempt and departure. If truth, do what is proper.’
The porter opened the door before Alexey
Alexandrovitch rang. The porter, Kapitonitch, looked
queer in an old coat, without a tie, and in slippers.
‘How is your mistress?’
Anna Karenina
897 of 1759
‘A successful confinement yesterday.’
Alexey Alexandrovitch stopped short and turned white.
He felt distinctly now how intensely he had longed for her
death.
‘And how is she?’
Korney in his morning apron ran downstairs.
‘Very ill,’ he answered. ‘There was a consultation
yesterday, and the doctor’s here now.’
‘Take my things,’ said Alexey Alexandrovitch, and
feeling some relief at the news that there was still hope of
her death, he went into the hall
On the hatstand there was a military overcoat. Alexey
Alexandrovitch noticed it and asked:
‘Who is here?’
‘The doctor, the midwife and Count Vronsky.’
Alexey Alexandrovitch went into the inner rooms.
I the drawing room there was no one; at the sound of
his steps there came out of her boudoir the midwife in a
cap with lilac ribbons.
She went up to Alexey Alexandrovitch, and with the
familiarity given by the approach of death took him by the
arm and drew him towards the bedroom.
‘Thank God you’ve come! She keeps on about you and
nothing but you,’ she said.
Anna Karenina
898 of 1759
‘Make haste with the ice!’ the doctor’s peremptory
voice said from the bedroom.
Alexey Alexandrovitch went into her boudoir.
At the table, sitting sideways in a low chair, was
Vronsky, his face hidden in his hands, weeping. He
jumped up at the doctor’s voice, took his hands from his
face, and saw Alexey Alexandrovitch. Seeing the husband,
he was so overwhelmed that he sat down again, drawing
his head down to his shoulders, as if he wanted to
disappear; but he made an effort over himself, got up and
said:
‘She is dying. The doctors say there is no hope. I am
entirely in your power, only let me be here...though I am
at your disposal. I..’
Alexey Alexandrovitch, seeing Vronsky’s tears, felt a
rush of that nervous emotion always produced in him by
the sight of other people’s suffering, and turning away his
face, he moved hurriedly to the door, without hearing the
rest of his words. From the bedroom came the sound of
Anna’s voice saying something. Her voice was lively,
eager, with exceedingly distinct intonations. Alexey
Alexandrovitch went into the bedroom, and went up to
the bed. She was lying turned with her face towards him.
Her cheeks were flushed crimson, her eyes glittered, her
Anna Karenina
899 of 1759
little white hands thrust out from the sleeves of her
dressing gown were playing with the quilt, twisting it
about. It seemed as though she were not only well and
blooming, but in the happiest frame of mind. She was
talking rapidly, musically, and with exceptionally correct
articulation and expressive intonation.
‘For Alexey—I am speaking of Alexey Alexandrovitch
(what a strange and awful thing that both are Alexey, isn’t
it?)—Alexey would not refuse me. I should forget, he
would forgive.... But why doesn’t he come? He’s so good
he doesn’t know himself how good he is. Ah, my God,
what agony! Give me some water, quick! Oh, that will be
bad for her, my little girl! Oh, very well then, give her to
a nurse. Yes, I agree, it’s better in fact. He’ll be coming; it
will hurt him to see her. Give her to the nurse.’
‘Anna Arkadyevna, he has come. Here he is!’ said the
midwife, trying to attract her attention to Alexey
Alexandrovitch.
‘Oh, what nonsense!’ Anna went on, not seeing her
husband. ‘No, give her to me; give me my little one! He
has not come yet. You say he won’t forgive me, because
you don’t know him. No one knows him. I’m the only
one, and it was hard for me even. His eyes I ought to
know—Seryozha has just the same eyes—and I can’t bear
Anna Karenina
900 of 1759
to see them because of it. Has Seryozha had his dinner? I
know everyone will forget him. He would not forget.
Seryozha must be moved into the corner room, and
Mariette must be asked to sleep with him.’
All of a sudden she shrank back, was silent; and in
terror, as though expecting a blow, as though to defend
herself, she raised her hands to her face. She had seen her
husband.
‘No, no!’ she began. ‘I am not afraid of him; I am afraid
of death. Alexey, come here. I am in a hurry, because I’ve
no time, I’ve not long left to live; the fever will begin
directly and I shall understand nothing more. Now I
understand, I understand it all, I see it all!’
Alexey Alexandrovitch’s wrinkled face wore an
expression of agony; he took her by the hand and tried to
say something, but he could not utter it; his lower lip
quivered, but he still went on struggling with his emotion,
and only now and then glanced at her. And each time he
glanced at her, he saw her eyes gazing at him with such
passionate and triumphant tenderness as he had never seen
in them.
‘Wait a minute, you don’t know...stay a little, stay!...’
She stopped, as though collecting her ideas. ‘Yes,’ she
began; ‘yes, yes, yes. This is what I wanted to say. Don’t
Anna Karenina
901 of 1759
be surprised at me. I’m still the same.... But there is
another woman in me, I’m afraid of her: she loved that
man, and I tried to hate you, and could not forget about
her that used to be. I’m not that woman. Now I’m my
real self, all myself. I’m dying now, I know I shall die, ask
him. Even now I feel—see here, the weights on my feet,
on my hands, on my fingers. My fingers—see how huge
they are! But this will soon all be over.... Only one thing I
want: forgive me, forgive me quite. I’m terrible, but my
nurse used to tell me; the holy martyr—what was her
name? She was worse. And I’ll go to Rome; there’s a
wilderness, and there I shall be no trouble to any one, only
I’ll take Seryozha and the little one.... No, you can’t
forgive me! I know, it can’t be forgiven! No, no, go away,
you’re too good!’ She held his hand in one burning hand,
while she pushed him away with the other.
The nervous agitation of Alexey Alexandrovitch kept
increasing, and had by now reached such a point that he
ceased to struggle with it. He suddenly felt that what he
had regarded as nervous agitation was on the contrary a
blissful spiritual condition that gave him all at once a new
happiness he had never known. He did not think that the
Christian law that he had been all his life trying to follow,
enjoined on him to forgive and love his enemies; but a
Anna Karenina
902 of 1759
glad feeling of love and forgiveness for his enemies filled
his heart. He knelt down, and laying his head in the curve
of her arm, which burned him as with fire through the
sleeve, he sobbed like a little child. She put her arm
around his head, moved towards him, and with defiant
pride lifted up her eyes.
‘That is he. I knew him! Now, forgive me, everyone,
forgive me!... They’ve come again; why don’t they go
away?... Oh, take these cloaks off me!’
The doctor unloosed her hands, carefully laying her on
the pillow, and covered her up to the shoulders. She lay
back submissively, and looked before her with beaming
eyes.
‘Remember one thing, that I needed nothing but
forgiveness, and I want nothing more.... Why doesn’t HE
come?’ she said, turning to the door towards Vronsky. ‘Do
come, do come! Give him your hand.’
Vronsky came to the side of the bed, and seeing Anna,
again hid his face in his hands.
‘Uncover your face—look at him! He’s a saint,’ she
said. ‘Oh! uncover your face, do uncover it!’ she said
angrily. ‘Alexey Alexandrovitch, do uncover his face! I
want to see him.’
Anna Karenina
903 of 1759
Alexey Alexandrovitch took Vronsky’s hands and drew
them away from his face, which was awful with the
expression of agony and shame upon it.
‘Give him your hand. Forgive him.’
Alexey Alexandrovitch gave him his hand, not
attempting to restrain the tears that streamed from his eyes.
‘Thank God, thank God!’ she said, ‘now everything is
ready. Only to stretch my legs a little. There, that’s capital.
How badly these flowers are done—not a bit like a violet,’
she said, pointing to the hangings. ‘My God, my God!
when will it end? Give me some morphine. Doctor, give
me some morphine! Oh, my God, my God!’
And she tossed about on the bed.
The doctors said that it was puerperal fever, and that it
was ninety-nine chances in a hundred it would end in
death. The whole day long there was fever, delirium, and
unconsciousness. At midnight the patient lay without
consciousness, and almost without pulse.
The end was expected every minute.
Vronsky had gone home, but in the morning he came
to inquire, and Alexey Alexandrovitch meeting him in the
hall, said: ‘Better stay, she might ask for you,’ and himself
led him to his wife’s boudoir. Towards morning, there
was a return again of excitement, rapid thought and talk,
Anna Karenina
904 of 1759
and again it ended in unconsciousness. On the third day it
was the same thing, and the doctors said there was hope.
That day Alexey Alexandrovitch went into the boudoir
where Vronsky was sitting, and closing the door sat down
opposite him.
‘Alexey Alexandrovitch,’ said Vronsky, feeling that a
statement of the position was coming, ‘I can’t speak, I
can’t understand. Spare me! However hard it is for you,
believe me, it is more terrible for me.’
He would have risen; but Alexey Alexandrovitch took
him by the hand and said:
‘I beg you to hear me out; it is necessary. I must
explain my feelings, the feelings that have guided me and
will guide me, so that you may not be in error regarding
me. You know I had resolved on a divorce, and had even
begun to take proceedings. I won’t conceal from you that
in beginning this I was in uncertainty, I was in misery; I
will confess that I was pursued by a desire to revenge
myself on you and on her. When I got the telegram, I
came here with the same feelings; I will say more, I longed
for her death. But....’ He paused, pondering whether to
disclose or not to disclose his feeling to him. ‘But I saw
her and forgave her. And the happiness of forgiveness has
revealed to me my duty. I forgive completely. I would
Anna Karenina
905 of 1759
offer the other cheek, I would give my cloak if my coat be
taken. I pray to God only not to take from me the bliss of
forgiveness!’
Tears stood in his eyes, and the luminous, serene look
in them impressed Vronsky.
‘This is my position: you can trample me in the mud,
make me the laughing-stock of the world, I will not
abandon her, and I will never utter a word of reproach to
you,’ Alexey Alexandrovitch went on. ‘My duty is clearly
marked for me; I ought to be with her, and I will be. If
she wishes to see you, I will let you know, but now I
suppose it would be better for you to go away.’
He got up, and sobs cut short his words. Vronsky too
was getting up, and in a stooping, not yet erect posture,
looked up at him from under his brows. He did not
understand Alexey Alexandrovitch’s feeling, but he felt
that it was something higher and even unattainable for
him with his view of life.
Anna Karenina
906 of 1759
Chapter 18
After the conversation with Alexey Alexandrovitch,
Vronsky went out onto the steps of the Karenins’ house
and stood still, with difficulty remembering where he was,
and where he ought to walk or drive. He felt disgraced,
humiliated, guilty, and deprived of all possibility of
washing away his humiliation. He felt thrust out of the
beaten track along which he had so proudly and lightly
walked till then. All the habits and rules of his life that had
seemed so firm, had turned out suddenly false and
inapplicable. The betrayed husband, who had figured till
that time as a pitiful creature, an incidental and somewhat
ludicrous obstacle to his happiness, had suddenly been
summoned by her herself, elevated to an awe-inspiring
pinnacle, and on the pinnacle that husband had shown
himself, not malignant, not false, not ludicrous, but kind
and straightforward and large. Vronsky could not but feel
this, and the parts were suddenly reversed. Vronsky felt his
elevation and his own abasement, his truth and his own
falsehood. He felt that the husband was magnanimous
even in his sorrow, while he had been base and petty in
his deceit. But this sense of his own humiliation before the
Anna Karenina
907 of 1759
man he had unjustly despised made up only a small part of
his misery. He felt unutterably wretched now, for his
passion for Anna, which had seemed to him of late to be
growing cooler, now that he knew he had lost her forever,
was stronger than ever it had been. He had seen all of her
in her illness, had come to know her very soul, and it
seemed to him that he had never loved her till then. And
now when he had learned to know her, to love her as she
should be loved, he had been humiliated before her, and
had lost her forever, leaving with her nothing of himself
but a shameful memory. Most terrible of all had been his
ludicrous, shameful position when Alexey Alexandrovitch
had pulled his hands away from his humiliated face. He
stood on the steps of the Karenins’ house like one
distraught, and did not know what to do.
‘A sledge, sir?’ asked the porter.
‘Yes, a sledge.’
On getting home, after three sleepless nights, Vronsky,
without undressing, lay down fiat on the sofa, clasping his
hands and laying his head on them. His head was heavy.
Images, memories, and ideas of the strangest description
followed one another with extraordinary rapidity and
vividness. First it was the medicine he had poured out for
the patient and spilt over the spoon, then the midwife’s
Anna Karenina
908 of 1759
white hands, then the queer posture of Alexey
Alexandrovitch on the floor beside the bed.
‘To sleep! To forget!’ he said to himself with the serene
confidence of a healthy man that if he is tired and sleepy,
he will go to sleep at once. And the same instant his head
did begin to feel drowsy and he began to drop off into
forgetfulness. The waves of the sea of unconsciousness had
begun to meet over his head, when all at once—it was as
though a violent shock of electricity had passed over him.
He started so that he leaped up on the springs of the sofa,
and leaning on his arms got in a panic onto his knees. His
eyes were wide open as though he had never been asleep.
The heaviness in his head and the weariness in his limbs
that he had felt a minute before had suddenly gone.
‘You may trample me in the mud,’ he heard Alexey
Alexandrovitch’s words and saw him standing before him,
and saw Anna’s face with its burning flush and glittering
eyes, gazing with love and tenderness not at him but at
Alexey Alexandrovitch; he saw his own, as he fancied,
foolish and ludicrous figure when Alexey Alexandrovitch
took his hands away from his face. He stretched out his
legs again and flung himself on the sofa in the same
position and shut his eyes.
Anna Karenina
909 of 1759
‘To sleep! To forget!’ he repeated to himself. But with
his eyes shut he saw more distinctly than ever Anna’s face
as it had been on the memorable evening before the races.
‘That is not and will not be, and she wants to wipe it
out of her memory. But I cannot live without it. How can
we be reconciled? how can we be reconciled?’ he said
aloud, and unconsciously began to repeat these words.
This repetition checked the rising up of fresh images and
memories, which he felt were thronging in his brain. But
repeating words did not check his imagination for long.
Again in extraordinarily rapid succession his best moments
rose before his mind, and then his recent humiliation.
‘Take away his hands,’ Anna’s voice says. He takes away
his hands and feels the shamestruck and idiotic expression
of his face.
He still lay down, trying to sleep, though he felt there
was not the smallest hope of it, and kept repeating stray
words from some chain of thought, trying by this to check
the rising flood of fresh images. He listened, and heard in a
strange, mad whisper words repeated: ‘I did not appreciate
it, did not make enough of it. I did not appreciate it, did
not make enough of it.’
‘What’s this? Am I going out of my mind?’ he said to
himself. ‘Perhaps. What makes men go out of their minds;
Anna Karenina
910 of 1759
what makes men shoot themselves?’ he answered himself,
and opening his eyes, he saw with wonder an embroidered
cushion beside him, worked by Varya, his brother’s wife.
He touched the tassel of the cushion, and tried to think of
Varya, of when he had seen her last. But to think of
anything extraneous was an agonizing effort. ‘No, I must
sleep!’ He moved the cushion up, and pressed his head
into it, but he had to make an effort to keep his eyes shut.
He jumped up and sat down. ‘That’s all over for me,’ he
said to himself. ‘I must think what to do. What is left?’ His
mind rapidly ran through his life apart from his love of
Anna.
‘Ambition? Serpuhovskoy? Society? The court?’ He
could not come to a pause anywhere. All of it had had
meaning before, but now there was no reality in it. He got
up from the sofa, took off his coat, undid his belt, and
uncovering his hairy chest to breathe more freely, walked
up and down the room. ‘This is how people go mad,’ he
repeated, ‘and how they shoot themselves...to escape
humiliation,’ he added slowly.
He went to the door and closed it, then with fixed eyes
and clenched teeth he went up to the table, took a
revolver, looked round him, turned it to a loaded barrel,
and sank into thought. For two minutes, his head bent
Anna Karenina
911 of 1759
forward with an expression of an intense effort of thought,
he stood with the revolver in his hand, motionless,
thinking.
‘Of course,’ he said to himself, as though a logical,
continuous, and clear chain of reasoning had brought him
to an indubitable conclusion. In reality this ‘of course,’
that seemed convincing to him, was simply the result of
exactly the same circle of memories and images through
which he had passed ten times already during the last
hour—memories of happiness lost forever. There was the
same conception of the senselessness of everything to
come in life, the same consciousness of humiliation. Even
the sequence of these images and emotions was the same.
‘Of course,’ he repeated, when for the third time his
thought passed again round the same spellbound circle of
memories and images, and pulling the revolver to the left
side of his chest, and clutching it vigorously with his
whole hand, as it were, squeezing it in his fist, he pulled
the trigger. He did not hear the sound of the shot, but a
violent blow on his chest sent him reeling. He tried to
clutch at the edge of the table, dropped the revolver,
staggered, and sat down on the ground, looking about him
in astonishment. He did not recognize his room, looking
up from the ground, at the bent legs of the table, at the
Anna Karenina
912 of 1759
wastepaper basket, and the tiger-skin rug. The hurried,
creaking steps of his servant coming through the drawing
room brought him to his senses. He made an effort at
thought, and was aware that he was on the floor; and
seeing blood on the tiger-skin rug and on his arm, he
knew he had shot himself.
‘Idiotic! Missed!’ he said, fumbling after the revolver.
The revolver was close beside him—he sought further off.
Still feeling for it, he stretched out to the other side, and
not being strong enough to keep his balance, fell over,
streaming with blood.
The elegant, whiskered manservant, who used to be
continually complaining to his acquaintances of the
delicacy of his nerves, was so panic-stricken on seeing his
master lying on the floor, that he left him losing blood
while he ran for assistance. An hour later Varya, his
brother’s wife, had arrived, and with the assistance of three
doctors, whom she had sent for in all directions, and who
all appeared at the same moment, she got the wounded
man to bed, and remained to nurse him.
Anna Karenina
913 of 1759
Chapter 19
The mistake made by Alexey Alexandrovitch in that,
when preparing for seeing his wife, he had overlooked the
possibility that her repentance might be sincere, and he
might forgive her, and she might not die—this mistake
was two months after his return from Moscow brought
home to him in all its significance. But the mistake made
by him had arisen not simply from his having overlooked
that contingency, but also from the fact that until that day
of his interview with his dying wife, he had not known his
own heart. At his sick wife’s bedside he had for the first
time in his life given way to that feeling of sympathetic
suffering always roused in him by the sufferings of others,
and hitherto looked on by him with shame as a harmful
weakness. And pity for her, and remorse for having
desired her death, and most of all, the joy of forgiveness,
made him at once conscious, not simply of the relief of his
own sufferings, but of a spiritual peace he had never
experienced before. He suddenly felt that the very thing
that was the source of his sufferings had become the
source of his spiritual joy; that what had seemed insoluble
Anna Karenina
914 of 1759
while he was judging, blaming, and hating, had become
clear and simple when he forgave and loved.
He forgave his wife and pitied her for her sufferings and
her remorse. He forgave Vronsky, and pitied him,
especially after reports reached him of his despairing
action. He felt more for his son than before. And he
blamed himself now for having taken too little interest in
him. But for the little newborn baby he felt a quite
peculiar sentiment, not of pity, only, but of tenderness. At
first, from a feeling of compassion alone, he had been
interested in the delicate little creature, who was not his
child, and who was cast on one side during her mother’s
illness, and would certainly have died if he had not
troubled about her, and he did not himself observe how
fond he became of her. He would go into the nursery
several times a day, and sit there for a long while, so that
the nurses, who were at first afraid of him, got quite used
to his presence. Sometimes for half an hour at a stretch he
would sit silently gazing at the saffron-red, downy,
wrinkled face of the sleeping baby, watching the
movements of the frowning brows, and the fat little hands,
with clenched fingers, that rubbed the little eyes and nose.
At such moments particularly, Alexey Alexandrovitch had
a sense of perfect peace and inward harmony, and saw
Anna Karenina
915 of 1759
nothing extraordinary in his position, nothing that ought
to be changed.
But as time went on, he saw more and more distinctly
that however natural the position now seemed to him, he
would not long be allowed to remain in it. He felt that
besides the blessed spiritual force controlling his soul, there
was another, a brutal force, as powerful, or more
powerful, which controlled his life, and that this force
would not allow him that humble peace he longed for. He
felt that everyone was looking at him with inquiring
wonder, that he was not understood, and that something
was expected of him. Above all, he felt the instability and
unnaturalness of his relations with his wife.
When the softening effect of the near approach of
death had passed away, Alexey Alexandrovitch began to
notice that Anna was afraid of him, ill at ease with him,
and could not look him straight in the face. She seemed to
be wanting, and not daring, to tell him something; and as
though foreseeing their present relations could not
continue, she seemed to be expecting something from
him.
Towards the end of February it happened that Anna’s
baby daughter, who had been named Anna too, fell ill.
Alexey Alexandrovitch was in the nursery in the morning,
Anna Karenina
916 of 1759
and leaving orders for the doctor to be sent for, he went
to his office. On finishing his work, he returned home at
four. Going into the hall he saw a handsome groom, in a
braided livery and a bear fur cape, holding a white fur
cloak.
‘Who is here?’ asked Alexey Alexandrovitch.
‘Princess Elizaveta Federovna Tverskaya,’ the groom
answered, and it seemed to Alexey Alexandrovitch that he
grinned.
During all this difficult time Alexey Alexandrovitch had
noticed that his worldly acquaintances, especially women,
took a peculiar interest in him and his wife. All these
acquaintances he observed with difficulty concealing their
mirth at something; the same mirth that he had perceived
in the lawyer’s eyes, and just now in the eyes of this
groom. Everyone seemed, somehow, hugely delighted, as
though they had just been at a wedding. When they met
him, with ill-disguised enjoyment they inquired after his
wife’s health. The presence of Princess Tverskaya was
unpleasant to Alexey Alexandrovitch from the memories
associated with her, and also because he disliked her, and
he went straight to the nursery. In the day nursery
Seryozha, leaning on the table with his legs on a chair, was
drawing and chatting away merrily. The English
Anna Karenina
917 of 1759
governess, who had during Anna’s illness replaced the
French one, was sitting near the boy knitting a shawl. She
hurriedly got up, curtseyed, and pulled Seryozha.
Alexey Alexandrovitch stroked his son’s hair, answered
the governess’s inquiries about his wife, and asked what
the doctor had said of the baby.
‘The doctor said it was nothing serious, and he ordered
a bath, sir.’
‘But she is still in pain,’ said Alexey Alexandrovitch,
listening to the baby’s screaming in the next room.
‘I think it’s the wet-nurse, sir,’ the Englishwoman said
firmly.
‘What makes you think so?’ he asked, stopping short.
‘It’s just as it was at Countess Paul’s, sir. They gave the
baby medicine, and it turned out that the baby was simply
hungry: the nurse had no milk, sir.’
Alexey Alexandrovitch pondered, and after standing
still a few seconds he went in at the other door. The baby
was lying with its head thrown back, stiffening itself in the
nurse’s arms, and would not take the plump breast offered
it; and it never ceased screaming in spite of the double
hushing of the wet-nurse and the other nurse, who was
bending over her.
‘Still no better?’ said Alexey Alexandrovitch.
Anna Karenina
918 of 1759
‘She’s very restless,’ answered the nurse in a whisper.
‘Miss Edwarde says that perhaps the wet-nurse has no
milk,’ he said.
‘I think so too, Alexey Alexandrovitch.’
‘Then why didn’t you say so?’
‘Who’s one to say it to? Anna Arkadyevna still ill...’
said the nurse discontentedly.
The nurse was an old servant of the family. And in her
simple words there seemed to Alexey Alexandrovitch an
allusion to his position.
The baby screamed louder than ever, struggling and
sobbing. The nurse, with a gesture of despair, went to it,
took it from the wet-nurse’s arms, and began walking up
and down, rocking it.
‘You must ask the doctor to examine the wet-nurse,’
said Alexey Alexandrovitch. The smartly dressed and
healthy-looking nurse, frightened at the idea of losing her
place, muttered something to herself, and covering her
bosom, smiled contemptuously at the idea of doubts being
cast on her abundance of milk. In that smile, too, Alexey
Alexandrovitch saw a sneer at his position.
‘Luckless child!’ said the nurse, hushing the baby, and
still walking up and down with it.
Anna Karenina
919 of 1759
Alexey Alexandrovitch sat down, and with a
despondent and suffering face watched the nurse walking
to and fro.
When the child at last was still, and had been put in a
deep bed, and the nurse, after smoothing the little pillow,
had left her, Alexey Alexandrovitch got up, and walking
awkwardly on tiptoe, approached the baby. For a minute
he was still, and with the same despondent face gazed at
the baby; but all at once a smile, that moved his hair and
the skin of his forehead, came out on his face, and he went
as softly out of the room.
In the dining room he rang the bell, and told the
servant who came in to send again for the doctor. He felt
vexed with his wife for not being anxious about this
exquisite baby, and in this vexed humor he had no wish to
go to her; he had no wish, either, to see Princess Betsy.
But his wife might wonder why he did not go to her as
usual; and so, overcoming his disinclination, he went
towards the bedroom. As he walked over the soft rug
towards the door, he could not help overhearing a
conversation he did not want to hear.
‘If he hadn’t been going away, I could have understood
your answer and his too. But your husband ought to be
above that,’ Betsy was saying.
Anna Karenina
920 of 1759
‘It’s not for my husband; for myself I don’t wish it.
Don’t say that!’ answered Anna’s excited voice.
‘Yes, but you must care to say good-bye to a man who
has shot himself on your account...’
‘That&#x2019;s just why I don’t want to.’
With a dismayed and guilty expression, Alexey
Alexandrovitch stopped and would have gone back
unobserved. But reflecting that this would be undignified,
he turned back again, and clearing his throat, he went up
to the bedroom. The voices were silent, and he went in.
Anna, in a gray dressing gown, with a crop of short
clustering black curls on her round head, was sitting on a
settee. The eagerness died out of her face, as it always did,
at the sight of her husband; she dropped her head and
looked round uneasily at Betsy. Betsy, dressed in the
height of the latest fashion, in a hat that towered
somewhere over her head like a shade on a lamp, in a blue
dress with violet crossway stripes slanting one way on the
bodice and the other way on the skirt, was sitting beside
Anna, her tall flat figure held erect. Bowing her head, she
greeted Alexey Alexandrovitch with an ironical smile.
‘Ah!’ she said, as though surprised. ‘I’m very glad
you’re at home. You never put in an appearance
anywhere, and I haven’t seen you ever since Anna has
Anna Karenina
921 of 1759
been ill. I have heard all about it—your anxiety. Yes,
you’re a wonderful husband!’ she said, with a meaning and
affable air, as though she were bestowing an order of
magnanimity on him for his conduct to his wife.
Alexey Alexandrovitch bowed frigidly, and kissing his
wife’s hand, asked how she was.
‘Better, I think,’ she said, avoiding his eyes.
‘But you’ve rather a feverish-looking color,’ he said,
laying stress on the word ‘feverish.’
‘We’ve been talking too much,’ said Betsy. ‘I feel it’s
selfishness on my part, and I am going away.’
She got up, but Anna, suddenly flushing, quickly
caught at her hand.
‘No, wait a minute, please. I must tell you...no, you.’
she turned to Alexey Alexandrovitch, and her neck and
brow were suffused with crimson. ‘I won’t and can’t keep
anything secret from you,’ she said.
Alexey Alexandrovitch cracked his fingers and bowed
his head.
‘Betsy’s been telling me that Count Vronsky wants to
come here to say good-bye before his departure for
Tashkend.’ She did not look at her husband, and was
evidently in haste to have everything out, however hard it
might be for her. ‘I told her I could not receive him.’
Anna Karenina
922 of 1759
‘You said, my dear, that it would depend on Alexey
Alexandrovitch,’ Betsy corrected her.
‘Oh, no, I can’t receive him; and what object would
there....’ She stopped suddenly, and glanced inquiringly at
her husband (he did not look at her). ‘In short, I don’t
wish it...’
Alexey Alexandrovitch advanced and would have taken
her hand.
Her first impulse was to jerk back her hand from the
damp hand with big swollen veins that sought hers, but
with an obvious effort to control herself she pressed his
hand.
‘I am very grateful to you for your confidence, but...’
he said, feeling with confusion and annoyance that what
he could decide easily and clearly by himself, he could not
discuss before Princess Tverskaya, who to him stood for
the incarnation of that brute force which would inevitably
control him in the life he led in the eyes of the world, and
hinder him from giving way to his feeling of love and
forgiveness. He stopped short, looking at Princess
Tverskaya.
‘Well, good-bye, my darling,’ said Betsy, getting up.
She kissed Anna, and went out. Alexey Alexandrovitch
escorted her out.
Anna Karenina
923 of 1759
‘Alexey Alexandrovitch! I know you are a truly
magnanimous man,’ said Betsy, stopping in the little
drawing-room, and with special warmth shaking hands
with him once more. ‘I am an outsider, but I so love her
and respect you that I venture to advise. Receive him.
Alexey Vronsky is the soul of honor, and he is going away
to Tashkend.’
‘Thank you, princess, for your sympathy and advice.
But the question of whether my wife can or cannot see
anyone she must decide herself.’
He said this from habit, lifting his brows with dignity,
and reflected immediately that whatever his words might
be, there could be no dignity in his position. And he saw
this by the suppressed, malicious, and ironical smile with
which Betsy glanced at him after this phrase.
Anna Karenina
924 of 1759