Chapter 20
Alexey Alexandrovitch took leave of Betsy in the
drawing room, and went to his wife. She was lying down,
but hearing his steps she sat up hastily in her former
attitude, and looked in a scared way at him. He saw she
had been crying.
‘I am very grateful for your confidence in me.’ He
repeated gently in Russian the phrase he had said in
Betsy’s presence in French, and sat down beside her.
When he spoke to her in Russian, using the Russian
‘thou’ of intimacy and affection, it was insufferably
irritating to Anna. ‘And I am very grateful for your
decision. I, too, imagine that since he is going away, there
is no sort of necessity for Count Vronsky to come here.
However, if..’
‘But I’ve said so already, so why repeat it?’ Anna
suddenly interrupted him with an irritation she could not
succeed in repressing. ‘No sort of necessity,’ she thought,
‘for a man to come and say good-bye to the woman he
loves, for whom he was ready to ruin himself, and has
ruined himself, and who cannot live without him. No sort
of necessity!’ she compressed her lips, and dropped her
Anna Karenina
925 of 1759
burning eyes to his hands with their swollen veins. They
were rubbing each other.
‘Let us never speak of it,’ she added more calmly.
‘I have left this question to you to decide, and I am
very glad to see...’ Alexey Alexandrovitch was beginning.
‘That my wish coincides with your own,’ she finished
quickly, exasperated at his talking so slowly while she
knew beforehand all he would say.
‘Yes,’ he assented; ‘and Princess Tverskaya’s
interference in the most difficult private affairs is utterly
uncalled for. She especially..’
‘I don’t believe a word of what’s said about her,’ said
Anna quickly. ‘I know she really cares for me.’
Alexey Alexandrovitch sighed and said nothing. She
played nervously with the tassel of her dressing-gown,
glancing at him with that torturing sensation of physical
repulsion for which she blamed herself, though she could
not control it. Her only desire now was to be rid of his
oppressive presence.
‘I have just sent for the doctor,’ said Alexey
Alexandrovitch.
‘I am very well; what do I want the doctor for?’
‘No, the little one cries, and they say the nurse hasn’t
enough milk.’
Anna Karenina
926 of 1759
‘Why didn’t you let me nurse her, when I begged to?
Anyway’ (Alexey Alexandrovitch knew what was meant
by that ‘anyway’), ‘she’s a baby, and they’re killing her.’
She rang the bell and ordered the baby to be brought her.
‘I begged to nurse her, I wasn’t allowed to, and now I’m
blamed for it.’
‘I don’t blame..’
‘Yes, you do blame me! My God! why didn’t I die!’
And she broke into sobs. ‘Forgive me, I’m nervous, I’m
unjust,’ she said, controlling herself, ‘but do go away..’
‘No, it can’t go on like this,’ Alexey Alexandrovitch
said to himself decidedly as he left his wife’s room.
Never had the impossibility of his position in the
world’s eyes, and his wife’s hatred of him, and altogether
the might of that mysterious brutal force that guided his
life against his spiritual inclinations, and exacted
conformity with its decrees and change in his attitude to
his wife, been presented to him with such distinctness as
that day. He saw clearly that all the world and his wife
expected of him something, but what exactly, he could
not make out. He felt that this was rousing in his soul a
feeling of anger destructive of his peace of mind and of all
the good of his achievement. He believed that for Anna
herself it would be better to break off all relations with
Anna Karenina
927 of 1759
Vronsky; but if they all thought this out of the question,
he was even ready to allow these relations to be renewed,
so long as the children were not disgraced, and he was not
deprived of them nor forced to change his position. Bad as
this might be, it was anyway better than a rupture, which
would put her in a hopeless and shameful position, and
deprive him of everything he cared for. But he felt
helpless; he knew beforehand that every one was against
him, and that he would not be allowed to do what seemed
to him now so natural and right, but would be forced to
do what was wrong, though it seemed the proper thing to
them.
Anna Karenina
928 of 1759
Chapter 21
Before Betsy had time to walk out of the drawingroom, she was met in the doorway by Stepan
Arkadyevitch, who had just come from Yeliseev’s, where
a consignment of fresh oysters had been received.
‘Ah! princess! what a delightful meeting!’ he began.
‘I’ve been to see you.’
‘A meeting for one minute, for I’m going,’ said Betsy,
smiling and putting on her glove.
‘Don’t put on your glove yet, princess; let me kiss your
hand. There’s nothing I’m so thankful to the revival of the
old fashions for as the kissing the hand.’ He kissed Betsy’s
hand. ‘When shall we see each other?’
‘You don’t deserve it,’ answered Betsy, smiling.
‘Oh, yes, I deserve a great deal, for I’ve become a most
serious person. I don’t only manage my own affairs, but
other people’s too,’ he said with a significant expression.
‘Oh, I’m so glad!’ answered Betsy, at once
understanding that he was speaking of Anna. And going
back into the drawing room, they stood in a corner. ‘He’s
killing her,’ said Betsy in a whisper full of meaning. ‘It’s
impossible, impossible..’
Anna Karenina
929 of 1759
‘I’m so glad you think so,’ said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
shaking his head with a serious and sympathetically
distressed expression, ‘that’s what I’ve come to Petersburg
for.’
‘The whole town’s talking of it,’ she said. ‘It’s an
impossible position. She pines and pines away. He doesn’t
understand that she’s one of those women who can’t trifle
with their feelings. One of two things! either let him take
her away, act with energy, or give her a divorce. This is
stifling her.’
‘Yes, yes...just so...’ Oblonsky said, sighing. ‘That’s
what I’ve come for. At least not solely for that...I’ve been
made a Kammerherr; of course, one has to say thank you.
But the chief thing was having to settle this.’
‘Well, God help you!’ said Betsy.
After accompanying Betsy to the outside hall, once
more kissing her hand above the glove, at the point where
the pulse beats, and murmuring to her such unseemly
nonsense that she did not know whether to laugh or be
angry, Stepan Arkadyevitch went to his sister. He found
her in tears.
Although he happened to be bubbling over with good
spirits, Stepan Arkadyevitch immediately and quite
naturally fell into the sympathetic, poetically emotional
Anna Karenina
930 of 1759
tone which harmonized with her mood. He asked her
how she was, and how she had spent the morning.
‘Very, very miserably. Today and this morning and all
past days and days to come,’ she said.
‘I think you’re giving way to pessimism. You must
rouse yourself, you must look life in the face. I know it’s
hard, but..’
‘I have heard it said that women love men even for
their vices,’ Anna began suddenly, ‘but I hate him for his
virtues. I can’t live with him. Do you understand? the
sight of him has a physical effect on me, it makes me
beside myself. I can’t, I can’t live with him. What am I to
do? I have been unhappy, and used to think one couldn’t
be more unhappy, but the awful state of things I am going
through now, I could never have conceived. Would you
believe it, that knowing he’s a good man, a splendid man,
that I’m not worth his little finger, still I hate him. I hate
him for his generosity. And there’s nothing left for me
but..’
She would have said death, but Stepan Arkadyevitch
would not let her finish.
‘You are ill and overwrought,’ he said; ‘believe me,
you’re exaggerating dreadfully. There’s nothing so terrible
in it.’
Anna Karenina
931 of 1759
And Stepan Arkadyevitch smiled. No one else in
Stepan Arkadyevitch’s place, having to do with such
despair, would have ventured to smile (the smile would
have seemed brutal); but in his smile there was so much of
sweetness and almost feminine tenderness that his smile
did not wound, but softened and soothed. His gentle,
soothing words and smiles were as soothing and softening
as almond oil. And Anna soon felt this.
‘No, Stiva,’ she said, ‘I’m lost, lost! worse than lost! I
can’t say yet that all is over; on the contrary, I feel that it’s
not over. I’m an overstrained string that must snap. But it’s
not ended yet...and it will have a fearful end.’
‘No matter, we must let the string be loosened, little by
little. There’s no position from which there is no way of
escape.’
‘I have thought, and thought. Only one..’
Again he knew from her terrified eyes that this one
way of escape in her thought was death, and he would not
let her say it.
‘Not at all,’ he said. ‘Listen to me. You can’t see your
own position as I can. Let me tell you candidly my
opinion.’ Again he smiled discreetly his almond-oil smile.
‘I’ll begin from the beginning. You married a man twenty
years older than yourself. You married him without love
Anna Karenina
932 of 1759
and not knowing what love was. It was a mistake, let’s
admit.’
‘A fearful mistake!’ said Anna.
‘But I repeat, it’s an accomplished fact. Then you had,
let us say, the misfortune to love a man not your husband.
That was a misfortune; but that, too, is an accomplished
fact. And your husband knew it and forgave it.’ He
stopped at each sentence, waiting for her to object, but she
made no answer. ‘That’s so. Now the question is: can you
go on living with your husband? Do you wish it? Does he
wish it?’
‘I know nothing, nothing.’
‘But you said yourself that you can’t endure him.’
‘No, I didn’t say so. I deny it. I can’t tell, I don’t know
anything about it.’
‘Yes, but let..’
‘You can’t understand. I feel I’m lying head downwards
in a sort of pit, but I ought not to save myself. And I can’t
. . .’
‘Never mind, we’ll slip something under and pull you
out. I understand you: I understand that you can’t take it
on yourself to express your wishes, your feelings.’
‘There’s nothing, nothing I wish...except for it to be all
over.’
Anna Karenina
933 of 1759
‘But he sees this and knows it. And do you suppose it
weighs on him any less than on you? You’re wretched,
he’s wretched, and what good can come of it? while
divorce would solve the difficulty completely.’ With some
effort Stepan Arkadyevitch brought out his central idea,
and looked significantly at her.
She said nothing, and shook her cropped head in
dissent. But from the look in her face, that suddenly
brightened into its old beauty, he saw that if she did not
desire this, it was simply because it seemed to her
unattainable happiness.
‘I’m awfully sorry for you! And how happy I should be
if I could arrange things!’ said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
smiling more boldly. ‘Don’t speak, don’t say a word! God
grant only that I may speak as I feel. I’m going to him.’
Anna looked at him with dreamy, shining eyes, and
said nothing.
Anna Karenina
934 of 1759
Chapter 22
Stepan Arkadyevitch, with the same somewhat solemn
expression with which he used to take his presidential
chair at his board, walked into Alexey Alexandrovitch’s
room. Alexey Alexandrovitch was walking about his room
with his hands behind his back, thinking of just what
Stepan Arkadyevitch had been discussing with his wife.
‘I’m not interrupting you?’ said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
on the sight of his brother-in-law becoming suddenly
aware of a sense of embarrassment unusual with him. To
conceal this embarrassment he took out a cigarette case he
had just bought that opened in a new way, and sniffing the
leather, took a cigarette out of it.
‘No. Do you want anything?’ Alexey Alexandrovitch
asked without eagerness.
‘Yes, I wished...I wanted...yes, I wanted to talk to you,’
said Stepan Arkadyevitch, with surprise aware of an
unaccustomed timidity.
This feeling was so unexpected and so strange that he
did not believe it was the voice of conscience telling him
that what he was meaning to do was wrong.
Anna Karenina
935 of 1759
Stepan Arkadyevitch made an effort and struggled with
the timidity that had come over him.
‘I hope you believe in my love for my sister and my
sincere affection and respect for you,’ he said, reddening.
Alexey Alexandrovitch stood still and said nothing, but
his face struck Stepan Arkadyevitch by its expression of an
unresisting sacrifice.
‘I intended...I wanted to have a little talk with you
about my sister and your mutual position,’ he said, still
struggling with an unaccustomed constraint.
Alexey Alexandrovitch smiled mournfully, looked at
his brother-in-law, and without answering went up to the
table, took from it an unfinished letter, and handed it to
his brother-in-law.
‘I think unceasingly of the same thing. And here is
what I had begun writing, thinking I could say it better by
letter, and that my presence irritates her,’ he said, as he
gave him the letter.
Stepan Arkadyevitch took the letter, looked with
incredulous surprise at the lusterless eyes fixed so
immovably on him, and began to read.
‘I see that my presence is irksome to you. Painful as it is
to me to believe it, I see that it is so, and cannot be
otherwise. I don’t blame you, and God is my witness that
Anna Karenina
936 of 1759
on seeing you at the time of your illness I resolved with
my whole heart to forget all that had passed between us
and to begin a new life. I do not regret, and shall never
regret, what I have done; but I have desired one thing—
your good, the good of your soul—and now I see I have
not attained that. Tell me yourself what will give you true
happiness and peace to your soul. I put myself entirely in
your hands, and trust to your feeling of what’s right.’
Stepan Arkadyevitch handed back the letter, and with
the same surprise continued looking at his brother-in-law,
not knowing what to say. This silence was so awkward for
both of them that Stepan Arkadyevitch’s lips began
twitching nervously, while he still gazed without speaking
at Karenin’s face.
‘That’s what I wanted to say to her,’ said Alexey
Alexandrovitch, turning away.
‘Yes, yes...’ said Stepan Arkadyevitch, not able to
answer for the tears that were choking him.
‘Yes, yes, I understand you,’ he brought out at last.
‘I want to know what she would like,’ said Alexey
Alexandrovitch.
‘I am afraid she does not understand her own position.
She is not a judge,’ said Stepan Arkadyevitch, recovering
himself. ‘She is crushed, simply crushed by your
Anna Karenina
937 of 1759
generosity. If she were to read this letter, she would be
incapable of saying anything, she would only hang her
head lower than ever.’
‘Yes, but what’s to be done in that case? how explain,
how find out her wishes?’
‘If you will allow me to give my opinion, I think that it
lies with you to point out directly the steps you consider
necessary to end the position.’
‘So you consider it must be ended?’ Alexey
Alexandrovitch interrupted him. ‘But how?’ he added,
with a gesture of his hands before his eyes not usual with
him. ‘I see no possible way out of it.’
‘There is some way of getting out of every position,’
said Stepan Arkadyevitch, standing up and becoming more
cheerful. ‘There was a time when you thought of breaking
off.... If you are convinced now that you cannot make
each other happy..’
‘Happiness may be variously understood. But suppose
that I agree to everything, that I want nothing: what way
is there of getting out of our position?’
‘If you care to know my opinion,’ said Stepan
Arkadyevitch with the same smile of softening, almond-oil
tenderness with which he had been talking to Anna. His
kindly smile was so winning that Alexey Alexandrovitch,
Anna Karenina
938 of 1759
feeling his own weakness and unconsciously swayed by it,
was ready to believe what Stepan Arkadyevitch was saying.
‘She will never speak out about it. But one thing is
possible, one thing she might desire,’ he went on: ‘that is
the cessation of your relations and all memories associated
with them. To my thinking, in your position what’s
essential is the formation of a new attitude to one another.
And that can only rest on a basis of freedom on both
sides.’
‘Divorce,’ Alexey Alexandrovitch interrupted, in a tone
of aversion.
‘Yes, I imagine that divorce—yes, divorce,’ Stepan
Arkadyevitch repeated, reddening. ‘That is from every
point of view the most rational course for married people
who find themselves in the position you are in. What can
be done if married people find that life is impossible for
them together? That may always happen.’
Alexey Alexandrovitch sighed heavily and closed his
eyes.
‘There’s only one point to be considered: is either of
the parties desirous of forming new ties? If not, it is very
simple,’ said Stepan Arkadyevitch, feeling more and more
free from constraint.
Anna Karenina
939 of 1759
Alexey Alexandrovitch, scowling with emotion,
muttered something to himself, and made no answer. All
that seemed so simple to Stepan Arkadyevitch, Alexey
Alexandrovitch had thought over thousands of times. And,
so far from being simple, it all seemed to him utterly
impossible. Divorce, the details of which he knew by this
time, seemed to him now out of the question, because the
sense of his own dignity and respect for religion forbade
his taking upon himself a fictitious charge of adultery, and
still more suffering his wife, pardoned and beloved by
him, to be caught in the fact and put to public shame.
Divorce appeared to him impossible also on other still
more weighty grounds.
What would become of his son in case of a divorce? To
leave him with his mother was out of the question. The
divorced mother would have her own illegitimate family,
in which his position as a stepson and his education would
not be good. Keep him with him? He knew that would be
an act of vengeance on his part, and that he did not want.
But apart from this, what more than all made divorce seem
impossible to Alexey Alexandrovitch was, that by
consenting to a divorce he would be completely ruining
Anna. The saying of Darya Alexandrovna at Moscow, that
in deciding on a divorce he was thinking of himself, and
Anna Karenina
940 of 1759
not considering that by this he would be ruining her
irrevocably, had sunk into his heart. And connecting this
saying with his forgiveness of her, with his devotion to the
children, he understood it now in his own way. To
consent to a divorce, to give her her freedom, meant in
his thoughts to take from himself the last tie that bound
him to life—the children whom he loved; and to take
from her the last prop that stayed her on the path of right,
to thrust her down to her ruin. If she were divorced, he
knew she would join her life to Vronsky’s, and their tie
would be an illegitimate and criminal one, since a wife, by
the interpretation of the ecclesiastical law, could not marry
while her husband was living. ‘She will join him, and in a
year or two he will throw her over, or she will form a
new tie,’ thought Alexey Alexandrovitch. ‘And I, by
agreeing to an unlawful divorce, shall be to blame for her
ruin.’ He had thought it all over hundreds of times, and
was convinced that a divorce was not at all simple, as
Stepan Arkadyevitch had said, but was utterly impossible.
He did not believe a single word Stepan Arkadyevitch said
to him; to every word he had a thousand objections to
make, but he listened to him, feeling that his words were
the expression of that mighty brutal force which
controlled his life and to which he would have to submit.
Anna Karenina
941 of 1759
‘The only question is on what terms you agree to give
her a divorce. She does not want anything, does not dare
ask you for anything, she leaves it all to your generosity.’
‘My God, my God! what for?’ thought Alexey
Alexandrovitch, remembering the details of divorce
proceedings in which the husband took the blame on
himself, and with just the same gesture with which
Vronsky had done the same, he hid his face for shame in
his hands.
‘You are distressed, I understand that. But if you think
it over..’
‘Whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to
him the other also; and if any man take away thy coat, let
him have thy cloak also,’ thought Alexey Alexandrovitch.
‘Yes, yes!’ he cried in a shrill voice. ‘I will take the
disgrace on myself, I will give up even my son, but...but
wouldn’t it be better to let it alone? Still you may do as
you like..’
And turning away so that his brother-in-law could not
see him, he sat down on a chair at the window. There was
bitterness, there was shame in his heart, but with bitterness
and shame he felt joy and emotion at the height of his
own meekness.
Anna Karenina
942 of 1759
Stepan Arkadyevitch was touched. He was silent for a
space.
‘Alexey Alexandrovitch, believe me, she appreciates
your generosity,’ he said. ‘But it seems it was the will of
God,’ he added, and as he said it felt how foolish a remark
it was, and with difficulty repressed a smile at his own
foolishness.
Alexey Alexandrovitch would have made some reply,
but tears stopped him.
‘This is an unhappy fatality, and one must accept it as
such. I accept the calamity as an accomplished fact, and am
doing my best to help both her and you,’ said Stepan
Arkadyevitch.
When he went out of his brother-in-law’s room he was
touched, but that did not prevent him from being glad he
had successfully brought the matter to a conclusion, for he
felt certain Alexey Alexandrovitch would not go back on
his words. To this satisfaction was added the fact that an
idea had just struck him for a riddle turning on his
successful achievement, that when the affair was over he
would ask his wife and most intimate friends. He put this
riddle into two or three different ways. ‘But I’ll work it
out better than that,’ he said to himself with a smile.
Anna Karenina
943 of 1759
Chapter 23
Vronsky’s wound had been a dangerous one, though it
did not touch the heart, and for several days he had lain
between life and death. The first time he was able to
speak, Varya, his brother’s wife, was alone in the room.
‘Varya,’ he said, looking sternly at her, ‘I shot myself by
accident. And please never speak of it, and tell everyone
so. Or else it’s too ridiculous.’
Without answering his words, Varya bent over him,
and with a delighted smile gazed into his face. His eyes
were clear, not feverish; but their expression was stern.
‘Thank God!’ she said. ‘You’re not in pain?’
‘A little here.’ He pointed to his breast.
‘Then let me change your bandages.’
In silence, stiffening his broad jaws, he looked at her
while she bandaged him up. When she had finished he
said:
‘I’m not delirious. Please manage that there may be no
talk of my having shot myself on purpose.’
‘No one does say so. Only I hope you won’t shoot
yourself by accident any more,’ she said, with a
questioning smile.
Anna Karenina
944 of 1759
‘Of course I won’t, but it would have been better..’
And he smiled gloomily.
In spite of these words and this smile, which so
frightened Varya, when the inflammation was over and he
began to recover, he felt that he was completely free from
one part of his misery. By his action he had, as it were,
washed away the shame and humiliation he had felt
before. He could now think calmly of Alexey
Alexandrovitch. He recognized all his magnanimity, but
he did not now feel himself humiliated by it. Besides, he
got back again into the beaten track of his life. He saw the
possibility of looking men in the face again without
shame, and he could live in accordance with his own
habits. One thing he could not pluck out of his heart,
though he never ceased struggling with it, was the regret,
amounting to despair, that he had lost her forever. That
now, having expiated his sin against the husband, he was
bound to renounce her, and never in future to stand
between her with her repentance and her husband, he had
firmly decided in his heart; but he could not tear out of his
heart his regret at the loss of her love, he could not erase
from his memory those moments of happiness that he had
so little prized at the time, and that haunted him in all
their charm.
Anna Karenina
945 of 1759
Serpuhovskoy had planned his appointment at
Tashkend, and Vronsky agreed to the proposition without
the slightest hesitation. But the nearer the time of
departure came, the bitterer was the sacrifice he was
making to what he thought his duty.
His wound had healed, and he was driving about
making preparations for his departure for Tashkend.
‘To see her once and then to bury myself, to die,’ he
thought, and as he was paying farewell visits, he uttered
this thought to Betsy. Charged with this commission,
Betsy had gone to Anna, and brought him back a negative
reply.
‘So much the better,’ thought Vronsky, when he
received the news. ‘It was a weakness, which would have
shattered what strength I have left.’
Next day Betsy herself came to him in the morning,
and announced that she had heard through Oblonsky as a
positive fact that Alexey Alexandrovitch had agreed to a
divorce, and that therefore Vronsky could see Anna.
Without even troubling himself to see Betsy out of his
fiat, forgetting all his resolutions, without asking when he
could see her, where her husband was, Vronsky drove
straight to the Karenins’. He ran up the stairs seeing no
one and nothing, and with a rapid step, almost breaking
Anna Karenina
946 of 1759
into a run, he went into her room. And without
considering, without noticing whether there was anyone
in the room or not, he flung his arms round her, and
began to cover her face, her hands, her neck with kisses.
Anna had been preparing herself for this meeting, had
thought what she would say to him, but she did not
succeed in saying anything of it; his passion mastered her.
She tried to calm him, to calm herself, but it was too late.
His feeling infected her. Her lips trembled so that for a
long while she could say nothing.
‘Yes, you have conquered me, and I am yours,’ she said
at last, pressing his hands to her bosom.
‘So it had to be,’ he said. ‘So long as we live, it must be
so. I know it now.’
‘That’s true,’ she said, getting whiter and whiter, and
embracing his head. ‘Still there is something terrible in it
after all that has happened.’
‘It will all pass, it will all pass; we shall be so happy.
Our love, if it could be stronger, will be strengthened by
there being something terrible in it,’ he said, lifting his
head and parting his strong teeth in a smile.
And she could not but respond with a smile—not to his
words, but to the love in his eyes. She took his hand and
stroked her chilled cheeks and cropped head with it.
Anna Karenina
947 of 1759
‘I don’t know you with this short hair. You’ve grown
so pretty. A boy. But how pale you are!’
‘Yes, I’m very weak,’ she said, smiling. And her lips
began trembling again.
‘We’ll go to Italy; you will get strong,’ he said.
‘Can it be possible we could be like husband and wife,
alone, your family with you?’ she said, looking close into
his eyes.
‘It only seems strange to me that it can ever have been
otherwise.’
‘Stiva says that HE has agreed to everything, but I can’t
accept HIS generosity,’ she said, looking dreamily past
Vronsky’s face. ‘I don’t want a divorce; it’s all the same to
me now. Only I don’t know what he will decide about
Seryozha.’
He could not conceive how at this moment of their
meeting she could remember and think of her son, of
divorce. What did it all matter?
‘Don’t speak of that, don’t think of it,’ he said, turning
her hand in his, and trying to draw her attention to him;
but still she did not look at him.
‘Oh, why didn’t I die! it would have been better,’ she
said, and silent tears flowed down both her cheeks; but she
tried to smile, so as not to wound him.
Anna Karenina
948 of 1759
To decline the flattering and dangerous appointment at
Tashkend would have been, Vronsky had till then
considered, disgraceful and impossible. But now, without
an instant’s consideration, he declined it, and observing
dissatisfaction in the most exalted quarters at this step, he
immediately retired from the army.
A month later Alexey Alexandrovitch was left alone
with his son in his house at Petersburg, while Anna and
Vronsky had gone abroad, not having obtained a divorce,
but having absolutely declined all idea of one.
Anna Karenina
949 of 1759
PART FIVE
Anna Karenina
950 of 1759
Chapter 1
Princess Shtcherbatskaya considered that it was out of
the question for the wedding to take place before Lent,
just five weeks off, since not half the trousseau could
possibly be ready by that time. But she could not but agree
with Levin that to fix it for after Lent would be putting it
off too late, as an old aunt of Prince Shtcherbatsky’s was
seriously ill and might die, and then the mourning would
delay the wedding still longer. And therefore, deciding to
divide the trousseau into two parts—a larger and smaller
trousseau—the princess consented to have the wedding
before Lent. She determined that she would get the
smaller part of the trousseau all ready now, and the larger
part should be made later, and she was much vexed with
Levin because he was incapable of giving her a serious
answer to the question whether he agreed to this
arrangement or not. The arrangement was the more
suitable as, immediately after the wedding, the young
people were to go to the country, where the more
important part of the trousseau would not be wanted.
Levin still continued in the same delirious condition in
which it seemed to him that he and his happiness
constituted the chief and sole aim of all existence, and that
Anna Karenina
951 of 1759
he need not now think or care about anything, that
everything was being done and would be done for him by
others. He had not even plans and aims for the future, he
left its arrangement to others, knowing that everything
would be delightful. His brother Sergey Ivanovitch,
Stepan Arkadyevitch, and the princess guided him in
doing what he had to do. All he did was to agree entirely
with everything suggested to him. His brother raised
money for him, the princess advised him to leave Moscow
after the wedding. Stepan Arkadyevitch advised him to go
abroad. He agreed to everything. ‘Do what you choose, if
it amuses you. I’m happy, and my happiness can be no
greater and no less for anything you do,’ he thought.
When he told Kitty of Stepan Arkadyevitch’s advice that
they should go abroad, he was much surprised that she did
not agree to this, and had some definite requirements of
her own in regard to their future. She knew Levin had
work he loved in the country. She did not, as he saw,
understand this work, she did not even care to understand
it. But that did not prevent her from regarding it as a
matter of great importance. And then she knew their
home would be in the country, and she wanted to go, not
abroad where she was not going to live, but to the place
where their home would be. This definitely expressed
Anna Karenina
952 of 1759
purpose astonished Levin. But since he did not care either
way, he immediately asked Stepan Arkadyevitch, as
though it were his duty, to go down to the country and to
arrange everything there to the best of his ability with the
taste of which he had so much.
‘But I say,’ Stepan Arkadyevitch said to him one day
after he had come back from the country, where he had
got everything ready for the young people’s arrival, ‘have
you a certificate of having been at confession?’
‘No. But what of it?’
‘You can’t be married without it.’
‘Aie, aie, aie!’ cried Levin. ‘Why, I believe it’s nine
years since I’ve taken the sacrament! I never thought of it.’
‘You’re a pretty fellow!’ said Stepan Arkadyevitch
laughing, ‘and you call me a Nihilist! But this won’t do,
you know. You must take the sacrament.’
‘When? There are four days left now.’
Stepan Arkadyevitch arranged this also, and Levin had
to go to confession. To Levin, as to any unbeliever who
respects the beliefs of others, it was exceedingly
disagreeable to be present at and take part in church
ceremonies. At this moment, in his present softened state
of feeling, sensitive to everything, this inevitable act of
hypocrisy was not merely painful to Levin, it seemed to
Anna Karenina
953 of 1759
him utterly impossible. Now, in the heyday of his highest
glory, his fullest flower, he would have to be a liar or a
scoffer. He felt incapable of being either. But though he
repeatedly plied Stepan Arkadyevitch with questions as to
the possibility of obtaining a certificate without actually
communicating, Stepan Arkadyevitch maintained that it
was out of the question.
‘Besides, what is it to you—two days? And he’s an
awfully nice clever old fellow. He’ll pull the tooth out for
you so gently, you won’t notice it.’
Standing at the first litany, Levin attempted to revive in
himself his youthful recollections of the intense religious
emotion he had passed through between the ages of
sixteen and seventeen.
But he was at once convinced that it was utterly
impossible to him. He attempted to look at it all as an
empty custom, having no sort of meaning, like the custom
of paying calls. But he felt that he could not do that either.
Levin found himself, like the majority of his
contemporaries, in the vaguest position in regard to
religion. Believe he could not, and at the same time he
had no firm conviction that it was all wrong. And
consequently, not being able to believe in the significance
of what he was doing nor to regard it with indifference as
Anna Karenina
954 of 1759
an empty formality, during the whole period of preparing
for the sacrament he was conscious of a feeling of
discomfort and shame at doing what he did not himself
understand, and what, as an inner voice told him, was
therefore false and wrong.
During the service he would first listen to the prayers,
trying to attach some meaning to them not discordant
with his own views; then feeling that he could not
understand and must condemn them, he tried not to listen
to them, but to attend to the thoughts, observations, and
memories which floated through his brain with extreme
vividness during this idle time of standing in church.
He had stood through the litany, the evening service
and the midnight service, and the next day he got up
earlier than usual, and without having tea went at eight
o’clock in the morning to the church for the morning
service and the confession.
There was no one in the church but a beggar soldier,
two old women, and the church officials. A young
deacon, whose long back showed in two distinct halves
through his thin undercassock, met him, and at once
going to a little table at the wall read the exhortation.
During the reading, especially at the frequent and rapid
repetition of the same words, ‘Lord, have mercy on us!’
Anna Karenina
955 of 1759
which resounded with an echo, Levin felt that thought
was shut and sealed up, and that it must not be touched or
stirred now or confusion would be the result; and so
standing behind the deacon he went on thinking of his
own affairs, neither listening nor examining what was said.
‘It’s wonderful what expression there is in her hand,’ he
thought, remembering how they had been sitting the day
before at a corner table. They had nothing to talk about, as
was almost always the case at this time, and laying her
hand on the table she kept opening and shutting it, and
laughed herself as she watched her action. He remembered
how he had kissed it and then had examined the lines on
the pink palm. ‘Have mercy on us again!’ thought Levin,
crossing himself, bowing, and looking at the supple spring
of the deacon’s back bowing before him. ‘She took my
hand then and examined the lines ‘You’ve got a splendid
hand,’ she said.’ And he looked at his own hand and the
short hand of the deacon. ‘Yes, now it will soon be over,’
he thought. ‘No, it seems to be beginning again,’ he
thought, listening to the prayers. ‘No, it’s just ending:
there he is bowing down to the ground. That’s always at
the end.’
The deacon’s hand in a plush cuff accepted a threerouble note unobtrusively, and the deacon said he would
Anna Karenina
956 of 1759
put it down in the register, and his new boots creaking
jauntily over the flagstones of the empty church, he went
to the altar. A moment later he peeped out thence and
beckoned to Levin. Thought, till then locked up, began to
stir in Levin’s head, but he made haste to drive it away. ‘It
will come right somehow,’ he thought, and went towards
the altar-rails. He went up the steps, and turning to the
right saw the priest. The priest, a little old man with a
scanty grizzled beard and weary, good-natured eyes, was
standing at the altar-rails, turning over the pages of a
missal. With a slight bow to Levin he began immediately
reading prayers in the official voice. When he had finished
them he bowed down to the ground and turned, facing
Levin.
‘Christ is present here unseen, receiving your
confession,’ he said, pointing to the crucifix. ‘Do you
believe in all the doctrines of the Holy Apostolic Church?’
the priest went on, turning his eyes away from Levin’s face
and folding his hands under his stole.
‘I have doubted, I doubt everything,’ said Levin in a
voice that jarred on himself, and he ceased speaking.
The priest waited a few seconds to see if he would not
say more, and closing his eyes he said quickly, with a
broad, Vladimirsky accent:
Anna Karenina
957 of 1759
‘Doubt is natural to the weakness of mankind, but we
must pray that God in His mercy will strengthen us. What
are your special sins?’ he added, without the slightest
interval, as though anxious not to waste time.
‘My chief sin is doubt. I have doubts of everything, and
for the most part I am in doubt.’
‘Doubt is natural to the weakness of mankind,’ the
priest repeated the same words. ‘What do you doubt about
principally?’
‘I doubt of everything. I sometimes even have doubts
of the existence of God,’ Levin could not help saying, and
he was horrified at the impropriety of what he was saying.
But Levin’s words did not, it seemed, make much
impression on the priest.
‘What sort of doubt can there be of the existence of
God?’ he said hurriedly, with a just perceptible smile.
Levin did not speak.
‘What doubt can you have of the Creator when you
behold His creation?’ the priest went on in the rapid
customary jargon. ‘Who has decked the heavenly
firmament with its lights? Who has clothed the earth in its
beauty? How explain it without the Creator?’ he said,
looking inquiringly at Levin.
Anna Karenina
958 of 1759
Levin felt that it would be improper to enter upon a
metaphysical discussion with the priest, and so he said in
reply merely what was a direct answer to the question.
‘I don’t know,’ he said.
‘You don’t know! Then how can you doubt that God
created all?’ the priest said, with good-humored
perplexity.
‘I don’t understand it at all,’ said Levin, blushing, and
feeling that his words were stupid, and that they could not
be anything but stupid n such a position.
‘Pray to God and beseech Him. Even the holy fathers
had doubts, and prayed to God to strengthen their faith.
The devil has great power, and we must resist him. Pray to
God, beseech Him. Pray to God,’ he repeated hurriedly.
The priest paused for some time, as though meditating.
‘You’re about, I hear, to marry the daughter of my
parishioner and son in the spirit, Prince Shtcherbatsky?’ he
resumed, with a smile. ‘An excellent young lady.’
‘Yes,’ answered Levin, blushing for the priest. ‘What
does he want to ask me about this at confession for?’ he
thought.
And, as though answering his thought, the priest said to
him:
Anna Karenina
959 of 1759
‘You are about to enter into holy matrimony, and God
may bless you with offspring. Well, what sort of bringingup can you give your babes if you do not overcome the
temptation of the devil, enticing you to infidelity?’ he said,
with gentle reproachfulness. ‘If you love your child as a
good father, you will not desire only wealth, luxury,
honor for your infant; you will be anxious for his
salvation, his spiritual enlightenment with the light of
truth. Eh? What answer will you make him when the
innocent babe asks you: ‘Papa! who made all that enchants
me in this world—the earth; the waters, the sun, the
flowers, the grass?’ Can you say to him: ‘I don’t know’?
You cannot but know, since the Lord God in His infinite
mercy has revealed it to us. Or your child will ask you:
‘What awaits me in the life beyond the tomb?’ What will
you say to him when you know nothing? How will you
answer him? Will you leave him to the allurements of the
world and the devil? That’s not right,’ he said, and he
stopped, putting his head on one side and looking at Levin
with his kindly, gentle eyes.
Levin made no answer this time, not because he did
not want to enter upon a discussion with the priest, but
because, so far, no one had ever asked him such questions,
Anna Karenina
960 of 1759
and when his babes did ask him those questions, it would
be time enough to think about answering them.
‘You are entering upon a time of life,’ pursued the
priest, ‘when you must choose your path and keep to it.
Pray to God that He may in His mercy aid you and have
mercy on you!’ he concluded. ‘Our Lord and God, Jesus
Christ, in the abundance and riches of His lovingkindness,
forgives this child...’ and, finishing the prayer of
absolution, the priest blessed him and dismissed him.
On getting home that day, Levin had a delightful sense
of relief at the awkward position being over and having
been got through without his having to tell a lie. Apart
from this, there remained a vague memory that what the
kind, nice old fellow had said had not been at all so stupid
as he had fancied at first, and that there was something in
it that must be cleared up.
‘Of course, not now,’ thought Levin, ‘but some day
later on.’ Levin felt more than ever now that there was
something not clear and not clean in his soul, and that, in
regard to religion, he was in the same position which he
perceived so clearly and disliked in others, and for which
he blamed his friend Sviazhsky.
Levin spent that evening with his betrothed at Dolly’s,
and was in very high spirits. To explain to Stepan
Anna Karenina
961 of 1759
Arkadyevitch the state of excitement in which he found
himself, he said that he was happy like a dog being trained
to jump through a hoop, who, having at last caught the
idea, and done what was required of him, whines and
wags its tail, and jumps up to the table and the windows in
its delight.
Anna Karenina
962 of 1759
Chapter 2
On the day of the wedding, according to the Russian
custom (the princess and Darya Alexandrovna insisted on
strictly keeping all the customs), Levin did not see his
betrothed, and dined at his hotel with three bachelor
friends, casually brought together at his rooms. These were
Sergey Ivanovitch, Katavasov, a university friend, now
professor of natural science, whom Levin had met in the
street and insisted on taking home with him, and
Tchirikov, his best man, a Moscow conciliation-board
judge, Levin’s companion in his bear-hunts. The dinner
was a very merry one: Sergey Ivanovitch was in his
happiest mood, and was much amused by Katavasov’s
originality. Katavasov, feeling his originality was
appreciated and understood, made the most of it.
Tchirikov always gave a lively and good-humored support
to conversation of any sort.
‘See, now,’ said Katavasov, drawling his words from a
habit acquired in the lecture-room, ‘what a capable fellow
was our friend Konstantin Dmitrievitch. I’m not speaking
of present company, for he’s absent. At the time he left the
university he was fond of science, took an interest in
Anna Karenina
963 of 1759
humanity; now one-half of his abilities is devoted to
deceiving himself, and the other to justifying the deceit.’
‘A more determined enemy of matrimony than you I
never saw,’ said Sergey Ivanovitch.
‘Oh, no, I’m not an enemy of matrimony. I’m in favor
of division of labor. People who can do nothing else
ought to rear people while the rest work for their
happiness and enlightenment. That’s how I look at it. To
muddle up two trades is the error of the amateur; I’m not
one of their number.’
‘How happy I shall be when I hear that you’re in love!’
said Levin. ‘Please invite me to the wedding.’
‘I’m in love now.’
‘Yes, with a cuttlefish! You know,’ Levin turned to his
brother, ‘Mihail Semyonovitch is writing a work on the
digestive organs of the..’
‘Now, make a muddle of it! It doesn’t matter what
about. And the fact is, I certainly do love cuttlefish.’
‘But that’s no hindrance to your loving your wife.’
‘The cuttlefish is no hindrance. The wife is the
hindrance.’
‘Why so?’
‘Oh, you’ll see! You care about farming, hunting,—
well, you’d better look out!’
Anna Karenina
964 of 1759
‘Arhip was here today; he said there were a lot of elks
in Prudno, and two bears,’ said Tchirikov.
‘Well, you must go and get them without me.’
‘Ah, that’s the truth,’ said Sergey Ivanovitch. ‘And you
may say good-bye to bear-hunting for the future—your
wife won’t allow it!’
Levin smiled. The picture of his wife not letting him
go was so pleasant that he was ready to renounce the
delights of looking upon bears forever.
‘Still, it’s a pity they should get those two bears without
you. Do you remember last time at Hapilovo? That was a
delightful hunt!’ said Tchirikov.
Levin had not the heart to disillusion him of the notion
that there could be something delightful apart from her,
and so said nothing.
‘There’s some sense in this custom of saying good-bye
to bachelor life,’ said Sergey Ivanovitch. ‘However happy
you may be, you must regret your freedom.’
‘And confess there is a feeling that you want to jump
out of the window, like Gogol’s bridegroom?’
‘Of course there is, but it isn’t confessed,’ said
Katavasov, and he broke into loud laughter.
‘Oh, well, the window’s open. Let’s start off this instant
to Tver! There’s a big she-bear; one can go right up to the
Anna Karenina
965 of 1759
lair. Seriously, let’s go by the five o’clock! And here let
them do what they like,’ said Tchirikov, smiling.
‘Well, now, on my honor,’ said Levin, smiling, ‘I can’t
find in my heart that feeling of regret for my freedom.’
‘Yes, there’s such a chaos in your heart just now that
you can’t find anything there,’ said Katavasov. ‘Wait a bit,
when you set it to rights a little, you’ll find it!’
‘No; if so, I should have felt a little, apart from my
feeling’ (he could not say love before them) ‘and
happiness, a certain regret at losing my freedom.... On the
contrary, I am glad at the very loss of my freedom.’
‘Awful! It’s a hopeless case!’ said Katavasov. ‘Well, let’s
drink to his recovery, or wish that a hundredth part of his
dreams may be realized—and that would be happiness
such as never has been seen on earth!’
Soon after dinner the guests went away to be in time to
be dressed for the wedding.
When he was left alone, and recalled the conversation
of these bachelor friends, Levin asked himself: had he in
his heart that regret for his freedom of which they had
spoken? He smiled at the question. ‘Freedom! What is
freedom for? Happiness is only in loving and wishing her
wishes, thinking her thoughts, that is to say, not freedom
at all—that’s happiness!’
Anna Karenina
966 of 1759
‘But do I know her ideas, her wishes, her feelings?’
some voice suddenly whispered to him. The smile died
away from his face, and he grew thoughtful. And suddenly
a strange feeling came upon him. There came over him a
dread and doubt—doubt of everything.
‘What if she does not love me? What if she’s marrying
me simply to be married? What if she doesn’t see herself
what she’s doing?’ he asked himself. ‘She may come to her
senses, and only when she is being married realize that she
does not and cannot love me.’ And strange, most evil
thoughts of her began to come to him. He was jealous of
Vronsky, as he had been a year ago, as though the evening
he had seen her with Vronsky had been yesterday. He
suspected she had not told him everything.
He jumped up quickly. ‘No, this can’t go on!’ he said
to himself in despair. ‘I’ll go to her; I’ll ask her; I’ll say for
the last time: we are free, and hadn’t we better stay so?
Anything’s better than endless misery, disgrace,
unfaithfulness!’ With despair in his heart and bitter anger
against all men, against himself, against her, he went out of
the hotel and drove to her house.
He found her in one of the back rooms. She was sitting
on a chest and making some arrangements with her maid,
Anna Karenina
967 of 1759
sorting over heaps of dresses of different colors, spread on
the backs of chairs and on the floor.
‘Ah!’ she cried, seeing him, and beaming with delight.
‘Kostya! Konstantin Dmitrievitch!’ (These latter days she
used these names almost alternately.) ‘I didn’t expect you!
I’m going through my wardrobe to see what’s for whom..’
‘Oh! that’s very nice!’ he said gloomily, looking at the
maid.
‘You can go, Dunyasha, I’ll call you presently,’ said
Kitty. ‘Kostya, what’s the matter?’ she asked, definitely
adopting this familiar name as soon as the maid had gone
out. She noticed his strange face, agitated and gloomy, and
a panic came over her.
‘Kitty! I’m in torture. I can’t suffer alone,’ he said with
despair in his voice, standing before her and looking
imploringly into her eyes. He saw already from her loving,
truthful face, that nothing could come of what he had
meant to say, but yet he wanted her to reassure him
herself. ‘I’ve come to say that there’s still time. This can all
be stopped and set right.’
‘What? I don’t understand. What is the matter?’
‘What I have said a thousand times over, and can’t help
thinking ...that I’m not worthy of you. You couldn’t
consent to marry me. Think a little. You’ve made a
Anna Karenina
968 of 1759
mistake. Think it over thoroughly. You can’t love me....
If...better say so,’ he said, not looking at her. ‘I shall be
wretched. Let people say what they like; anything’s better
than misery.... Far better now while there’s still time...’
‘I don’t understand,’ she answered, panic-stricken; ‘you
mean you want to give it up...don’t want it?’
‘Yes, if you don’t love me.’
‘You’re out of your mind!’ she cried, turning crimson
with vexation. But his face was so piteous, that she
restrained her vexation, and flinging some clothes off an
arm-chair, she sat down beside him. ‘What are you
thinking? tell me all.’
‘I am thinking you can’t love me. What can you love
me for?’
‘My God! what can I do?...’ she said, and burst into
tears.
‘Oh! what have I done?’ he cried, and kneeling before
her, he fell to kissing her hands.
When the princess came into the room five minutes
later, she found them completely reconciled. Kitty had not
simply assured him that she loved him, but had gone so
far—in answer to his question, what she loved him for—as
to explain what for. She told him that she loved him
because she understood him completely, because she knew
Anna Karenina
969 of 1759
what he would like, and because everything he liked was
good. And this seemed to him perfectly clear. When the
princess came to them, they were sitting side by side on
the chest, sorting the dresses and disputing over Kitty’s
wanting to give Dunyasha the brown dress she had been
wearing when Levin proposed to her, while he insisted
that that dress must never be given away, but Dunyasha
must have the blue one.
‘How is it you don’t see? She’s a brunette, and it won’t
suit her.... I’ve worked it all out.’
Hearing why he had come, the princess was half
humorously, half seriously angry with him, and sent him
home to dress and not to hinder Kitty’s hair-dressing, as
Charles the hair-dresser was just coming.
‘As it is, she’s been eating nothing lately and is losing
her looks, and then you must come and upset her with
your nonsense,’ she said to him. ‘Get along with you, my
dear!’
Levin, guilty and shamefaced, but pacified, went back
to his hotel. His brother, Darya Alexandrovna, and Stepan
Arkadyevitch, all in full dress, were waiting for him to
bless him with the holy picture. There was no time to
lose. Darya Alexandrovna had to drive home again to
fetch her curled and pomaded son, who was to carry the
Anna Karenina
970 of 1759
holy pictures after the bride. Then a carriage had to be
sent for the best man, and another that would take Sergey
Ivanovitch away would have to be sent back.... Altogether
there were a great many most complicated matters to be
considered and arranged. One thing was unmistakable,
that there must be no delay, as it was already half-past six.
Nothing special happened at the ceremony of
benediction with the holy picture. Stepan Arkadyevitch
stood in a comically solemn pose beside his wife, took the
holy picture, and telling Levin to bow down to the
ground, he blessed him with his kindly, ironical smile, and
kissed him three times; Darya Alexandrovna did the same,
and immediately vas in a hurry to get off, and again
plunged into the intricate question of the destinations of
the various carriages.
‘Come, I’ll tell you how we’ll manage: you drive in
our carriage to fetch him, and Sergey Ivanovitch, if he’ll
be so good, will drive there and then send his carriage.’
‘Of course; I shall be delighted.’
‘We’ll come on directly with him. Are your things sent
off?’ said Stepan Arkadyevitch.
‘Yes,’ answered Levin, and he told Kouzma to put out
his clothes for him to dress.
Anna Karenina
971 of 1759
Chapter 3
A crowd of people, principally women, was thronging
round the church lighted up for the wedding. Those who
had not succeeded in getting into the main entrance were
crowding about the windows, pushing, wrangling, and
peeping through the gratings.
More than twenty carriages had already been drawn up
in ranks along the street by the police. A police officer,
regardless of the frost, stood at the entrance, gorgeous in
his uniform. More carriages were continually driving up,
and ladies wearing flowers and carrying their trains, and
men taking off their helmets or black hats kept walking
into the church. Iside the church both lusters were already
lighted, and all the candles before the holy pictures. The
gilt on the red ground of the holy picture-stand, and the
gilt relief on the pictures, and the silver of the lusters and
candlesticks, and the stones of the floor, and the rugs, and
the banners above in the choir, and the steps of the altar,
and the old blackened books, and the cassocks and
surplices—all were flooded with light. On the right side of
the warm church, in the crowd of frock coats and white
ties, uniforms and broadcloth, velvet, satin, hair and
Anna Karenina
972 of 1759
flowers, bare shoulders and arms and long gloves, there
was discreet but lively conversation that echoed strangely
in the high cupola. Every time there was heard the creak
of the opened door the conversation in the crowd died
away, and everybody looked round expecting to see the
bride and bridegroom come in. But the door had opened
more than ten times, and each time it was either a belated
guest or guests, who joined the circle of the invited on the
right, or a spectator, who had eluded or softened the
police officer, and went to join the crowd of outsiders on
the left. Both the guests and the outside public had by
now passed through all the phases of anticipation.
At first they imagined that the bride and bridegroom
would arrive immediately, and attached no importance at
all to their being late. Then they began to look more and
more often towards the door, and to talk of whether
anything could have happened. Then the long delay began
to be positively discomforting, and relations and guests
tried to look as if they were not thinking of the
bridegroom but were engrossed in conversation.
The head deacon, as though to remind them of the
value of his time, coughed impatiently, making the
window-panes quiver in their frames. In the choir the
bored choristers could be heard trying their voices and
Anna Karenina
973 of 1759
blowing their noses. The priest was continually sending
first the beadle and then the deacon to find out whether
the bridegroom had not come, more and more often he
went himself, in a lilac vestment and an embroidered sash,
to the side door, expecting to see the bridegroom. At last
one of the ladies, glancing at her watch, said, ‘It really is
strange, though!’ and all the guests became uneasy and
began loudly expressing their wonder and dissatisfaction.
One of the bridegroom’s best men went to find out what
had happened. Kitty meanwhile had long ago been quite
ready, and in her white dress and long veil and wreath of
orange blossoms she was standing in the drawing-room of
the Shtcherbatskys’ house with her sister, Madame Lvova,
who was her bridal-mother. She was looking out of the
window, and had been for over half an hour anxiously
expecting to hear from her best man that her bridegroom
was at the church.
Levin meanwhile, in his trousers, but without his coat
and waistcoat, was walking to and fro in his room at the
hotel, continually putting his head out of the door and
looking up and down the corridor. But in the corridor
there was no sign of the person he was looking for and he
came back in despair, and frantically waving his hands
Anna Karenina
974 of 1759
addressed Stepan Arkadyevitch, who was smoking
serenely.
‘Was ever a man in such a fearful fool’s position?’ he
said.
‘Yes, it is stupid,’ Stepan Arkadyevitch asserted, smiling
soothingly. ‘But don’t worry, it’ll be brought directly.’
‘No, what is to be done!’ said Levin, with smothered
fury. ‘And these fools of open waistcoats! Out of the
question!’ he said, looking at the crumpled front of his
shirt. ‘And what if the things have been taken on to the
railway station!’ he roared in desperation.
‘Then you must put on mine.’
‘I ought to have done so long ago, if at all.’
‘It’s not nice to look ridiculous.... Wait a bit! it will
come round.’
The point was that when Levin asked for his evening
suit, Kouzma, his old servant, had brought him the coat,
waistcoat, and everything that was wanted.
‘But the shirt!’ cried Levin.
‘You’ve got a shirt on,’ Konzma answered, with a
placid smile.
Kouzma had not thought of leaving out a clean shirt,
and on receiving instructions to pack up everything and
send it round to the Shtcherbatskys’ house, from which
Anna Karenina
975 of 1759
the young people were to set out the same evening, he
had done so, packing everything but the dress suit. The
shirt worn since the morning was crumpled and out of the
question with the fashionable open waistcoat. It was a long
way to send to the Shtcherbatskys’. They sent out to buy a
shirt. The servant came back; everything was shut up—it
was Sunday. They sent to Stepan Arkadyevitch’s and
brought a shirt—it was impossibly wide and short. They
sent finally to the Shtcherbatskys’ to unpack the things.
The bridegroom was expected at the church while he was
pacing up and down his room like a wild beast in a cage,
peeping out into the corridor, and with horror and despair
recalling what absurd things he had said to Kitty and what
she might be thinking now.
At last the guilty Kouzma flew panting into the room
with the shirt.
‘Only just in time. They were just lifting it into the
van,’ said Kouzma.
Three minutes later Levin ran full speed into the
corridor, not looking at his watch for fear of aggravating
his sufferings.
‘You won’t help matters like this,’ said Stepan
Arkadyevitch with a smile, hurrying with more
Anna Karenina
976 of 1759
deliberation after him. ‘It will come round, it will come
round...I tell you.’
Anna Karenina
977 of 1759
Chapter 4
‘They’ve come!’ ‘Here he is!’ ‘Which one?’ ‘Rather
young, eh?’ ‘Why, my dear soul, she looks more dead than
alive!’ were the comments in the crowd, when Levin,
meeting his bride in the entrance, walked with her into
the church.
Stepan Arkadyevitch told his wife the cause of the
delay, and the guests were whispering it with smiles to one
another. Levin saw nothing and no one; he did not take
his eyes off his bride.
Everyone said she had lost her looks dreadfully of late,
and was not nearly so pretty on her wedding day as usual;
but Levin did not think so. He looked at her hair done up
high, with the long white veil and white flowers and the
high, stand-up, scalloped collar, that in such a maidenly
fashion hid her long neck at the sides and only showed it
in front, her strikingly slender figure, and it seemed to him
that she looked better than ever—not because these
flowers, this veil, this gown from Paris added anything to
her beauty; but because, in spite of the elaborate
sumptuousness of her attire, the expression of her sweet
Anna Karenina
978 of 1759
face, of her eyes, of her lips was still her own characteristic
expression of guileless truthfulness.
‘I was beginning to think you meant to run away,’ she
said, and smiled to him.
‘It’s so stupid, what happened to me, I’m ashamed to
speak of it!’ he said, reddening, and he was obliged to turn
to Sergey Ivanovitch, who came up to him.
‘This is a pretty story of yours about the shirt!’ said
Sergey Ivanovitch, shaking his head and smiling.
‘Yes, yes!’ answered Levin, without an idea of what
they were talking about.
‘Now, Kostya, you have to decide,’ said Stepan
Arkadyevitch with an air of mock dismay, ‘a weighty
question. You are at this moment just in the humor to
appreciate all its gravity. They ask me, are they to light the
candles that have been lighted before or candles that have
never been lighted? It’s a matter of ten roubles,’ he added,
relaxing his lips into a smile. ‘I have decided, but I was
afraid you might not agree.’
Levin saw it was a joke, but he could not smile.
‘Well, how’s it to be then?—unlighted or lighted
candles? that’s the question.’
‘Yes, yes, unlighted.’
Anna Karenina
979 of 1759
‘Oh, I’m very glad. The question’s decided!’ said
Stepan Arkadyevitch, smiling. ‘How silly men are, though,
in this position,’ he said to Tchirikov, when Levin, after
looking absently at him, had moved back to his bride.
‘Kitty, mind you’re the first to step on the carpet,’ said
Countess Nordston, coming up. ‘You’re a nice person!’
she said to Levin.
‘Aren’t you frightened, eh?’ said Marya Dmitrievna, an
old aunt.
‘Are you cold? You’re pale. Stop a minute, stoop
down,’ said Kitty’s sister, Madame Lvova, and with her
plump, handsome arms she smilingly set straight the
flowers on her head.
Dolly came up, tried to say something, but could not
speak, cried and then laughed unnaturally.
Kitty looked at all of them with the same absent eyes as
Levin.
Meanwhile the officiating clergy had got into their
vestments, and the priest and deacon came out to the
lectern, which stood in the forepart of the church. The
priest turned to Levin saying something. Levin did not
hear what the priest said.
‘Take the bride’s hand and lead her up,’ the best man
said to Levin.
Anna Karenina
980 of 1759
It was a long while before Levin could make out what
was expected of him. For a long time they tried to set him
right and made him begin again—because he kept taking
Kitty by the wrong arm or with the wrong arm—till he
understood at last that what he had to do was, without
changing his position, to take her right hand in his right
hand. When at last he had taken the bride’s hand in the
correct way, the priest walked a few paces in front of them
and stopped at the lectern. The crowd of friends and
relations moved after them, with a buzz of talk and a rustle
of skirts. Someone stooped down and pulled out the
bride’s train. The church became so still that the drops of
wax could be heard falling from the candles.
The little old priest in his ecclesiastical cap, with his
long silvery-gray locks of hair parted behind his ears, was
fumbling with something at the lectern, putting out his
little old hands from under the heavy silver vestment with
the gold cross on the back of it.
Stepan Arkadyevitch approached him cautiously,
whispered something, and making a sign to Levin, walked
back again.
The priest lighted two candles, wreathed with flowers,
and holding them sideways so that the wax dropped
slowly from them he turned, facing the bridal pair. The
Anna Karenina
981 of 1759
priest was the same old man that had confessed Levin. He
looked with weary and melancholy eyes at the bride and
bridegroom, sighed, and putting his right hand out from
his vestment, blessed the bridegroom with it, and also with
a shade of solicitous tenderness laid the crossed fingers on
the bowed head of Kitty. Then he gave them the candles,
and taking the censer, moved slowly away from them.
‘Can it be true?’ thought Levin, and he looked round
at his bride. Looking down at her he saw her face in
profile, and from the scarcely perceptible quiver of her lips
and eyelashes he knew she was aware of his eyes upon her.
She did not look round, but the high scalloped collar, that
reached her little pink ear, trembled faintly. He saw that a
sigh was held back in her throat, and the little hand in the
long glove shook as it held the candle.
All the fuss of the shirt, of being late, all the talk of
friends and relations, their annoyance, his ludicrous
position—all suddenly passed way and he was filled with
joy and dread.
The handsome, stately head-deacon wearing a silver
robe and his curly locks standing out at each side of his
head, stepped smartly forward, and lifting his stole on two
fingers, stood opposite the priest.
Anna Karenina
982 of 1759
‘Blessed be the name of the Lord,’ the solemn syllables
rang out slowly one after another, setting the air quivering
with waves of sound.
‘Blessed is the name of our God, from the beginning, is
now, and ever shall be,’ the little old priest answered in a
submissive, piping voice, still fingering something at the
lectern. And the full chorus of the unseen choir rose up,
filling the whole church, from the windows to the vaulted
roof, with broad waves of melody. It grew stronger, rested
for an instant, and slowly died away.
They prayed, as they always do, for peace from on high
and for salvation, for the Holy Synod, and for the Tsar;
they prayed, too, for the servants of God, Konstantin and
Ekaterina, now plighting their troth.
‘Vouchsafe to them love made perfect, peace and help,
O Lord, we beseech Thee,’ the whole church seemed to
breathe with the voice of the head deacon.
Levin heard the words, and they impressed him. ‘How
did they guess that it is help, just help that one wants?’ he
thought, recalling all his fears and doubts of late. ‘What do
I know? what can I do in this fearful business,’ he thought,
‘without help? Yes, it is help I want now.’
When the deacon had finished the prayer for the
Imperial family, the priest turned to the bridal pair with a
Anna Karenina
983 of 1759
book: ‘Eternal God, that joinest together in love them that
were separate,’ he read in a gentle, piping voice: ‘who hast
ordained the union of holy wedlock that cannot be set
asunder, Thou who didst bless Isaac and Rebecca and their
descendants, according to Thy Holy Covenant; bless Thy
servants, Konstantin and Ekaterina, leading them in the
path of all good works. For gracious and merciful art
Thou, our Lord, and glory be to Thee, the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost, now and ever shall be.’
‘Amen!’ the unseen choir sent rolling again upon the
air.
’ ‘Joinest together in love them that were separate.’
What deep meaning in those words, and how they
correspond with what one feels at this moment,’ thought
Levin. ‘Is she feeling the same as I?’
And looking round, he met her eyes, and from their
expression he concluded that she was understanding it just
as he was. But this was a mistake; she almost completely
missed the meaning of the words of the service; she had
not heard them, in fact. She could not listen to them and
take them in, so strong was the one feeling that filled her
breast and grew stronger and stronger. That feeling was
joy at the completion of the process that for the last month
and a half had been going on in her soul, and had during
Anna Karenina
984 of 1759
those six weeks been a joy and a torture to her. On the
day when in the drawing room of the house in Arbaty
Street she had gone up to him in her brown dress, and
given herself to him without a word—on that day, at that
hour, there took place in her heart a complete severance
from all her old life, and a quite different, new, utterly
strange life had begun for her, while the old life was
actually going on as before. Those six weeks had for her
been a time of the utmost bliss and the utmost misery. All
her life, all her desires and hopes were concentrated on
this one man, still uncomprehended by her, to whom she
was bound by a feeling of alternate attraction and
repulsion, even less comprehended than the man himself,
and all the while she was going on living in the outward
conditions of her old life. Living the old life, she was
horrified at herself, at her utter insurmountable callousness
to all her own past, to things, to habits, to the people she
had loved, who loved her—to her mother, who was
wounded by her indifference, to her kind, tender father,
till then dearer than all the world. At one moment she was
horrified at this indifference, at another she rejoiced at
what had brought her to this indifference. She could not
frame a thought, not a wish apart from life with this man;
but this new life was not yet, and she could not even
Anna Karenina
985 of 1759
picture it clearly to herself. There was only anticipation,
the dread and joy of the new and the unknown. And now
behold—anticipation and uncertainty and remorse at the
abandonment of the old life—all was ending, and the new
was beginning. This new life could not but have terrors
for her inexperience; but, terrible or not, the change had
been wrought six weeks before in her soul, and this was
merely the final sanction of what had long been completed
in her heart.
Turning again to the lectern, the priest with some
difficulty took Kitty’s little ring, and asking Levin for his
hand, put it on the first joint of his finger. ‘The servant of
God, Konstantin, plights his troth to the servant of God,
Ekaterina.’ And putting his big ring on Kitty’s touchingly
weak, pink little finger, the priest said the same thing.
And the bridal pair tried several times to understand
what they had to do, and each time made some mistake
and were corrected by the priest in a whisper. At last,
having duly performed the ceremony, having signed the
rings with the cross, the priest handed Kitty the big ring,
and Levin the little one. Again they were puzzled and
passed the rings from hand to hand, still without doing
what was expected.
Anna Karenina
986 of 1759
Dolly, Tchirikov, and Stepan Arkadyevitch stepped
forward to set them right. There was an interval of
hesitation, whispering, and smiles; but the expression of
solemn emotion on the faces of the betrothed pair did not
change: on the contrary, in their perplexity over their
hands they looked more grave and deeply moved than
before, and the smile with which Stepan Arkadyevitch
whispered to them that now they would each put on their
own ring died away on his lips. He had a feeling that any
smile would jar on them.
‘Thou who didst from the beginning create male and
female,’ the priest read after the exchange of rings, ‘from
Thee woman was given to man to be a helpmeet to him,
and for the procreation of children. O Lord, our God,
who hast poured down the blessings of Thy Truth
according to Thy Holy Covenant upon Thy chosen
servants, our fathers, from generation to generation, bless
Thy servants Konstantin and Ekaterina, and make their
troth fast in faith, and union of hearts, and truth, and
love...’
Levin felt more and more that all his ideas of marriage,
all his dreams of how he would order his life, were mere
childishness, and that it was something he had not
understood hitherto, and now understood less than ever,
Anna Karenina
987 of 1759
though it was being performed upon him. The lump in his
throat rose higher and higher, tears that would not be
checked came into his eyes.
Anna Karenina
988 of 1759
Chapter 5
In the church there was all Moscow, all the friends and
relations; and during the ceremony of plighting troth, in
the brilliantly lighted church, there was an incessant flow
of discreetly subdued talk in the circle of gaily dressed
women and girls, and men in white ties, frockcoats, and
uniforms. The talk was principally kept up by the men,
while the women were absorbed in watching every detail
of the ceremony, which always means so much to them.
In the little group nearest to the bride were her two
sisters: Dolly, and the other one, the self-possessed beauty,
Madame Lvova, who had just arrived from abroad.
‘Why is it Marie’s in lilac, as bad as black, at a
wedding?’ said Madame Korsunskaya.
‘With her complexion, it’s the one salvation,’
responded Madame Trubetskaya. ‘I wonder why they had
the wedding in the evening? It’s like shop-people..’
‘So much prettier. I was married in the evening too...’
answered Madame Korsunskaya, and she sighed,
remembering how charming she had been that day, and
how absurdly in love her husband was, and how different
it all was now.
Anna Karenina
989 of 1759
‘They say if anyone’s best man more than ten times,
he’ll never be married. I wanted to be for the tenth time,
but the post was taken,’ said Count Siniavin to the pretty
Princess Tcharskaya, who had designs on him.
Princess Tcharskaya only answered with a smile. She
looked at Kitty, thinking how and when she would stand
with Count Siniavin in Kitty’s place, and how she would
remind him then of his joke today.
Shtcherbatsky told the old maid of honor, Madame
Nikolaeva, that he meant to put the crown on Kitty’s
chignon for luck.
‘She ought not to have worn a chignon,’ answered
Madame Nikolaeva, who had long ago made up her mind
that if the elderly widower she was angling for married
her, the wedding should be of the simplest. ‘I don’t like
such grandeur.’
Sergey Ivanovitch was talking to Darya Dmitrievna,
jestingly assuring her that the custom of going away after
the wedding was becoming common because newly
married people always felt a little ashamed of themselves.
‘Your brother may feel proud of himself. She’s a marvel
of sweetness. I believe you’re envious.’
Anna Karenina
990 of 1759
‘Oh, I’ve got over that, Darya Dmitrievna,’ he
answered, and a melancholy and serious expression
suddenly came over his face.
Stepan Arkadyevitch was telling his sister-in-law his
joke about divorce.
‘The wreath wants setting straight,’ she answered, not
hearing him.
‘What a pity she’s lost her looks so,’ Countess
Nordston said to Madame Lvova. ‘Still he’s not worth her
little finger, is he?’
‘Oh, I like him so—not because he’s my future beaufrere,’ answered Madame Lvova. ‘And how well he’s
behaving! It’s so difficult, too, to look well in such a
position, not to be ridiculous. And he’s not ridiculous, and
not affected; one can see he’s moved.’
‘You expected it, I suppose?’
‘Almost. She always cared for him.’
‘Well, we shall see which of them will step on the rug
first. I warned Kitty.’
‘It will make no difference,’ said Madame Lvova;
‘we’re all obedient wives; it’s in our family.’
‘Oh, I stepped on the rug before Vassily on purpose.
And you, Dolly?’
Anna Karenina
991 of 1759
Dolly stood beside them; she heard them, but she did
not answer. She was deeply moved. The tears stood in her
eyes, and she could not have spoken without crying. She
was rejoicing over Kitty and Levin; going back in thought
to her own wedding, she glanced at the radiant figure of
Stepan Arkadyevitch, forgot all the present, and
remembered only her own innocent love. She recalled not
herself only, but all her women-friends and acquaintances.
She thought of them on the one day of their triumph,
when they had stood like Kitty under the wedding crown,
with love and hope and dread in their hearts, renouncing
the past, and stepping forward into the mysterious future.
Among the brides that came back to her memory, she
thought too of her darling Anna, of whose proposed
divorce she had just been hearing. And she had stood just
as innocent in orange flowers and bridal veil. And now?
‘It’s terribly strange,’ she said to herself. It was not merely
the sisters, the women-friends and female relations of the
bride who were following every detail of the ceremony.
Women who were quite strangers, mere spectators, were
watching it excitedly, holding their breath, in fear of
losing a single movement or expression of the bride and
bridegroom, and angrily not answering, often not hearing,
Anna Karenina
992 of 1759
the remarks of the callous men, who kept making joking
or irrelevant observations.
‘Why has she been crying? Is she being married against
her will?’
‘Against her will to a fine fellow like that? A prince,
isn’t he?’
‘Is that her sister in the white satin? Just listen how the
deacon booms out, ‘And fearing her husband.’’
‘Are the choristers from Tchudovo?’
‘No, from the Synod.’
‘I asked the footman. He says he’s going to take her
home to his country place at once. Awfully rich, they say.
That’s why she’s being married to him.’
‘No, they’re a well-matched pair.’
‘I say, Marya Vassilievna, you were making out those
fly-away crinolines were not being worn. Just look at her
in the puce dress—an ambassador’s wife they say she is—
how her skirt bounces out from side to sides.’
‘What a pretty dear the bride is—like a lamb decked
with flowers! Well, say what you will, we women feel for
our sister.’
Such were the comments in the crowd of gazing
women who had succeeded in slipping in at the church
doors.
Anna Karenina
993 of 1759
Chapter 6
When the ceremony of plighting troth was over, the
beadle spread before the lectern in the middle of the
church a piece of pink silken stuff, the choir sang a
complicated and elaborate psalm, in which the bass and
tenor sang responses to one another, and the priest turning
round pointed the bridal pair to the pink silk rug. Though
both had often heard a great deal about the saying that the
one who steps first on the rug will be the head of the
house, neither Levin nor Kitty were capable of
recollecting it, as they took the few steps towards it. They
did not hear the loud remarks and disputes that followed,
some maintaining he had stepped on first, and others that
both had stepped on together.
After the customary questions, whether they desired to
enter upon matrimony, and whether they were pledged to
anyone else, and their answers, which sounded strange to
themselves, a new ceremony began. Kitty listened to the
words of the prayer, trying to make out their meaning, but
she could not. The feeling of triumph and radiant
happiness flooded her soul more and more as the
Anna Karenina
994 of 1759
ceremony went on, and deprived her of all power of
attention.
They prayed: ‘Endow them with continence and
fruitfulness, and vouchsafe that their hearts may rejoice
looking upon their sons and daughters.’ They alluded to
God’s creation of a wife from Adam’s rib ‘and for this
cause a man shall leave father and mother, and cleave unto
his wife, and they two shall be one flesh,’ and that ‘this is a
great mystery"; they prayed that God would make them
fruitful and bless them, like Isaac and Rebecca, Joseph,
Moses and Zipporah, and that they might look upon their
children’s children. ‘That’s all splendid,’ thought Kitty,
catching the words, ‘all that’s just as it should be,’ and a
smile of happiness, unconsciously reflected in everyone
who looked at her, beamed on her radiant face.
‘Put it on quite,’ voices were heard urging when the
priest had put on the wedding crowns and Shtcherbatsky,
his hand shaking in its three-button glove, held the crown
high above her head.
‘Put it on!’ she whispered, smiling.
Levin looked round at her, and was struck by the joyful
radiance on her face, and unconsciously her feeling
infected him. He too, like her felt glad and happy.
Anna Karenina
995 of 1759
They enjoyed hearing the epistle read, and the roll of
the head deacon’s voice at the last verse, awaited with
such impatience by the outside public. They enjoyed
drinking out of the shallow cup of warm red wine and
water, and they were still more pleased when the priest,
flinging back his stole and taking both their hands in his,
led them round the lectern to the accompaniment of bass
voices chanting ‘Glory to God.’
Shtcherbatsky and Tchirikov, supporting the crowns
and stumbling over the bride’s train, smiling too and
seeming delighted at something, were at one moment left
behind, at the next treading on the bridal pair as the priest
came to a halt. The spark of joy kindled in Kitty seemed
to have infected everyone in the church. It seemed to
Levin that the priest and the deacon too wanted to smile
just as he did.
Taking the crowns off their heads the priest read the
last prayer and congratulated the young people. Levin
looked at Kitty, and he had never before seen her look as
she did. She was charming with the new radiance of
happiness in her face. Levin longed to say something to
her, but he did not know whether it was all over. The
priest got him out of his difficulty. He smiled his kindly
Anna Karenina
996 of 1759
smile and said gently, ‘Kiss your wife, and you kiss your
husband,’ and took the candles out of their hands.
Levin kissed her smiling lips with timid care, gave her
his arm, and with a new strange sense of closeness, walked
out of the church. He did not believe, he could not
believe, that it was true. It was only when their wondering
and timid eyes met that he believed in it, because he felt
that they were one.
After supper, the same night, the young people left for
the country.
Anna Karenina
997 of 1759
Chapter 7
Vronsky and Anna had been traveling for three months
together in Europe. They had visited Venice, Rome, and
Naples, and had just arrived at a small Italian town where
they meant to stay some time. A handsome head waiter,
with thick pomaded hair parted from the neck upwards,
an evening coat, a broad white cambric shirt front, and a
bunch of trinkets hanging above his rounded stomach,
stood with his hands in the full curve of his pockets,
looking contemptuously from under his eyelids while he
gave some frigid reply to a gentleman who had stopped
him. Catching the sound of footsteps coming from the
other side of the entry towards the staircase, the head
waiter turned round, and seeing the Russian count, who
had taken their best rooms, he took his hands out of his
pockets deferentially, and with a bow informed him that a
courier had been, and that the business about the palazzo
had been arranged. The steward was prepared to sign the
agreement.
‘Ah! I’m glad to hear it,’ said Vronsky. ‘Is madame at
home or not?’
Anna Karenina
998 of 1759
‘Madame has been out for a walk but has returned
now,’ answered the waiter.
Vronsky took off his soft, wide-brimmed hat and passed
his handkerchief over his heated brow and hair, which had
grown half over his ears, and was brushed back covering
the bald patch on his head. And glancing casually at the
gentleman, who still stood there gazing intently at him, he
would have gone on.
‘This gentleman is a Russian, and was inquiring after
you,’ said the head waiter.
With mingled feelings of annoyance at never being able
to get away from acquaintances anywhere, and longing to
find some sort of diversion from the monotony of his life,
Vronsky looked once more at the gentleman, who had
retreated and stood still again, and at the same moment a
light came into the eyes of both.
‘Golenishtchev!’
‘Vronsky!’
It really was Golenishtchev, a comrade of Vronsky’s in
the Corps of Pages. In the corps Golenishtchev had
belonged to the liberal party; he left the corps without
entering the army, and had never taken office under the
government. Vronsky and he had gone completely
Anna Karenina
999 of 1759
different ways on leaving the corps, and had only met
once since.
At that meeting Vronsky perceived that Golenishtchev
had taken up a sort of lofty, intellectually liberal line, and
was consequently disposed to look down upon Vronsky’s
interests and calling in life. Hence Vronsky had met him
with the chilling and haughty manner he so well knew
how to assume, the meaning of which was: ‘You may like
or dislike my way of life, that’s a matter of the most
perfect indifference to me; you will have to treat me with
respect if you want to know me.’ Golenishtchev had been
contemptuously indifferent to the tone taken by Vronsky.
This second meeting might have been expected, one
would have supposed, to estrange them still more. But
now they beamed and exclaimed with delight on
recognizing one another. Vronsky would never have
expected to be so pleased to see Golenishtchev, but
probably he was not himself aware how bored he was. He
forgot the disagreeable impression of their last meeting,
and with a face of frank delight held out his hand to his
old comrade. The same expression of delight replaced the
look of uneasiness on Golenishtchev’s face.
‘How glad I am to meet you!’ said Vronsky, showing
his strong white teeth in a friendly smile.
Anna Karenina
1000 of 1759
‘I heard the name Vronsky, but I didn’t know which
one. I’m very, very glad!’
‘Let’s go in. Come, tell me what you’re doing.’
‘I’ve been living here for two years. I’m working.’
‘Ah!’ said Vronsky, with sympathy; ‘let’s go in.’ And
with the habit common with Russians, instead of saying in
Russian what he wanted to keep from the servants, he
began to speak in French.
‘Do you know Madame Karenina? We are traveling
together. I am going to see her now,’ he said in French,
carefully scrutinizing Golenishtchev’s face.
‘Ah! I did not know’ (though he did know),
Golenishtchev answered carelessly. ‘Have you been here
long?’ he added.
‘Four days,’ Vronsky answered, once more scrutinizing
his friend’s face intently.
‘Yes, he’s a decent fellow, and will look at the thing
properly,’ Vronsky said to himself, catching the
significance of Golenishtchev’s face and the change of
subject. ‘I can introduce him to Anna, he looks at it
properly.’
During those three months that Vronsky had spent
abroad with Anna, he had always on meeting new people
asked himself how the new person would look at his
Anna Karenina
1001 of 1759
relations with Anna, and for the most part, in men, he had
met with the ‘proper’ way of looking at it. But if he had
been asked, and those who looked at it ‘properly’ had
been asked, exactly how they did look at it, both he and
they would have been greatly puzzled to answer.
In reality, those who in Vronsky’s opinion had the
‘proper’ view had no sort of view at all, but behaved in
general as well-bred persons do behave in regard to all the
complex and insoluble problems with which life is
encompassed on all sides; they behaved with propriety,
avoiding allusions and unpleasant questions. They assumed
an air of fully comprehending the import and force of the
situation, of accepting and even approving of it, but of
considering it superfluous and uncalled for to put all this
into words.
Vronsky at once divined that Golenishtchev was of this
class, and therefore was doubly pleased to see him. And in
fact, Golenishtchev’s manner to Madame Karenina, when
he was taken to call on her, was all that Vronsky could
have desired. Obviously without the slightest effort he
steered clear of all subjects which might lead to
embarrassment.
He had never met Anna before, and was struck by her
beauty, and still more by the frankness with which she
Anna Karenina
1002 of 1759
accepted her position. She blushed when Vronsky brought
in Golenishtchev, and he was extremely charmed by this
childish blush overspreading her candid and handsome
face. But what he liked particularly was the way in which
at once, as though on purpose that there might be no
misunderstanding with an outsider, she called Vronsky
simply Alexey, and said they were moving into a house
they had just taken, what was here called a palazzo.
Golenishtchev liked this direct and simple attitude to her
own position. Looking at Anna’s manner of simplehearted, spirited gaiety, and knowing Alexey
Alexandrovitch and Vronsky, Golenishtchev fancied that
he understood her perfectly. He fancied that he
understood what she was utterly unable to understand:
how it was that, having made her husband wretched,
having abandoned him and her son and lost her good
name, she yet felt full of spirits, gaiety, and happiness.
‘It’s in the guide-book,’ said Golenishtchev, referring to
the palazzo Vronsky had taken. ‘There’s a first-rate
Tintoretto there. One of his latest period.’
‘I tell you what: it’s a lovely day, let’s go and have
another look at it,’ said Vronsky, addressing Anna.
‘I shall be very glad to; I’ll go and put on my hat.
Would you say it’s hot?’ she said, stopping short in the
Anna Karenina
1003 of 1759
doorway and looking inquiringly at Vronsky. And again a
vivid flush overspread her face.
Vronsky saw from her eyes that she did not know on
what terms he cared to be with Golenishtchev, and so was
afraid of not behaving as he would wish.
He looked a long, tender look at her.
‘No, not very,’ he said.
And it seemed to her that she understood everything,
most of all, that he was pleased with her; and smiling to
him, she walked with her rapid step out at the door.
The friends glanced at one another, and a look of
hesitation came into both faces, as though Golenishtchev,
unmistakably admiring her, would have liked to say
something about her, and could not find the right thing to
say, while Vronsky desired and dreaded his doing so.
‘Well then,’ Vronsky began to start a conversation of
some sort; ‘so you’re settled here? You’re still at the same
work, then?’ he went on, recalling that he had been told
Golenishtchev was writing something.
‘Yes, I’m writing the second part of the Two
Elements,’ said Golenishtchev, coloring with pleasure at
the question—‘that is, to be exact, I am not writing it yet;
I am preparing, collecting materials. It will be of far wider
scope, and will touch on almost all questions. We in
Anna Karenina
1004 of 1759
Russia refuse to see that we are the heirs of Byzantium,’
and he launched into a long and heated explanation of his
views.
Vronsky at the first moment felt embarrassed at not
even knowing of the first part of the Two Elements, of
which the author spoke as something well known. But as
Golenishtchev began to lay down his opinions and
Vronsky was able to follow them even without knowing
the Two Elements, he listened to him with some interest,
for Golenishtchev spoke well. But Vronsky was startled
and annoyed by the nervous irascibility with which
Golenishtchev talked of the subject that engrossed him. As
he went on talking, his eyes glittered more and more
angrily; he was more and more hurried in his replies to
imaginary opponents, and his face grew more and more
excited and worried. Remembering Golenishtchev, a thin,
lively, good-natured and well-bred boy, always at the head
of the class, Vronsky could not make out the reason of his
irritability, and he did not like it. What he particularly
disliked was that Golenishtchev, a man belonging to a
good set, should put himself on a level with some
scribbling fellows, with whom he was irritated and angry.
Was it worth it? Vronsky disliked it, yet he felt that
Golenishtchev was unhappy, and was sorry for him.
Anna Karenina
1005 of 1759
Unhappiness, almost mental derangement, was visible on
his mobile, rather handsome face, while without even
noticing Anna’s coming in, he went on hurriedly and
hotly expressing his views.
When Anna came in in her hat and cape, and her
lovely hand rapidly swinging her parasol, and stood beside
him, it was with a feeling of relief that Vronsky broke
away from the plaintive eyes of Golenishtchev which
fastened persistently upon him, and with a fresh rush of
love looked at his charming companion, full of life and
happiness. Golenishtchev recovered himself with an effort,
and at first was dejected and gloomy, but Anna, disposed
to feel friendly with everyone as she was at that time, soon
revived his spirits by her direct and lively manner. After
trying various subjects of conversation, she got him upon
painting, of which he talked very well, and she listened to
him attentively. They walked to the house they had taken,
and looked over it.
‘I am very glad of one thing,’ said Anna to
Golenishtchev when they were on their way back: ‘Alexey
will have a capital atelier. You must certainly take that
room,’ she said to Vronsky in Russian, using the
affectionately familiar form as though she saw that
Golenishtchev would become intimate with them in their
Anna Karenina
1006 of 1759
isolation, and that there was no need of reserve before
him.
‘Do you paint?’ said Golenishtchev, turning round
quickly to Vronsky.
‘Yes, I used to study long ago, and now I have begun
to do a little,’ said Vronsky, reddening.
‘He has great talent,’ said Anna with a delighted smile.
‘I’m no judge, of course. But good judges have said the
same.’
Anna Karenina
1007 of 1759
Chapter 8
Anna, in that first period of her emancipation and rapid
return to health, felt herself unpardonably happy and full
of the joy of life. The thought of her husband’s
unhappiness did not poison her happiness. On one side
that memory was too awful to be thought of. On the
other side her husband’s unhappiness had given her too
much happiness to be regretted. The memory of all that
had happened after her illness: her reconciliation with her
husband, its breakdown, the news of Vronsky’s wound, his
visit, the preparations for divorce, the departure from her
husband’s house, the parting from her son—all that
seemed to her like a delirious dream, from which she had
waked up alone with Vronsky abroad. The thought of the
harm caused to her husband aroused in her a feeling like
repulsion, and akin to what a drowning man might feel
who has shaken off another man clinging to him. That
man did drown. It was an evil action, of course, but it was
the sole means of escape, and better not to brood over
these fearful facts.
One consolatory reflection upon her conduct had
occurred to her at the first moment of the final rupture,
Anna Karenina
1008 of 1759
and when now she recalled all the past, she remembered
that one reflection. ‘I have inevitably made that man
wretched,’ she thought; ‘but I don’t want to profit by his
misery. I too am suffering, and shall suffer; I am losing
what I prized above everything—I am losing my good
name and my son. I have done wrong, and so I don’t want
happiness, I don’t want a divorce, and shall suffer from my
shame and the separation from my child.’ But, however
sincerely Anna had meant to suffer, she was not suffering.
Shame there was not. With the tact of which both had
such a large share, they had succeeded in avoiding Russian
ladies abroad, and so had never placed themselves in a false
position, and everywhere they had met people who
pretended that they perfectly understood their position, far
better indeed than they did themselves. Separation from
the son she loved—even that did not cause her anguish in
these early days. The baby girl—HIS child—was so sweet,
and had so won Anna’s heart, since she was all that was left
her, that Anna rarely thought of her son.
The desire for life, waxing stronger with recovered
health, was so intense, and the conditions of life were so
new and pleasant, that Anna felt unpardonably happy. The
more she got to know Vronsky, the more she loved him.
She loved him for himself, and for his love for her. Her
Anna Karenina
1009 of 1759
complete ownership of him was a continual joy to her.
His presence was always sweet to her. All the traits of his
character, which she learned to know better and better,
were unutterably dear to her. His appearance, changed by
his civilian dress, was as fascinating to her as though she
were some young girl in love. In everything he said,
thought, and did, she saw something particularly noble
and elevated. Her adoration of him alarmed her indeed;
she sought and could not find in him anything not fine.
She dared not show him her sense of her own
insignificance beside him. It seemed to her that, knowing
this, he might sooner cease to love her; and she dreaded
nothing now so much as losing his love, though she had
no grounds for fearing it. But she could not help being
grateful to him for his attitude to her, and showing that
she appreciated it. He, who had in her opinion such a
marked aptitude for a political career, in which he would
have been certain to play a leading part—he had sacrificed
his ambition for her sake, and never betrayed the slightest
regret. He was more lovingly respectful to her than ever,
and the constant care that she should not feel the
awkwardness of her position never deserted him for a
single instant. He, so manly a man, never opposed her,
had indeed, with her, no will of his own, and was anxious,
Anna Karenina
1010 of 1759
it seemed, for nothing but to anticipate her wishes. And
she could not but appreciate this, even though the very
intensity of his solicitude for her, the atmosphere of care
with which he surrounded her, sometimes weighed upon
her.
Vronsky, meanwhile, in spite of the complete
realization of what he had so long desired, was not
perfectly happy. He soon felt that the realization of his
desires gave him no more than a grain of sand out of the
mountain of happiness he had expected. It showed him
the mistake men make in picturing to themselves
happiness as the realization of their desires. For a time after
joining his life to hers, and putting on civilian dress, he
had felt all the delight of freedom in general of which he
had known nothing before, and of freedom in his love,—
and he was content, but not for long. He was soon aware
that there was springing up in his heart a desire for
desires—ennui. Without conscious intention he began to
clutch at every passing caprice, taking it for a desire and an
object. Sixteen hours of the day must be occupied in some
way, since they were living abroad in complete freedom,
outside the conditions of social life which filled up time in
Petersburg. As for the amusements of bachelor existence,
which had provided Vronsky with entertainment on
Anna Karenina
1011 of 1759
previous tours abroad, they could not be thought of, since
the sole attempt of the sort had led to a sudden attack of
depression in Anna, quite out of proportion with the
cause—a late supper with bachelor friends. Relations with
the society of the place—foreign and Russian—were
equally out of the question owing to the irregularity of
their position. The inspection of objects of interest, apart
from the fact that everything had been seen already, had
not for Vronsky, a Russian and a sensible man, the
immense significance Englishmen are able to attach to that
pursuit.
And just as the hungry stomach eagerly accepts every
object it can get, hoping to find nourishment in it,
Vronsky quite unconsciously clutched first at politics, then
at new books, and then at pictures.
As he had from a child a taste for painting, and as, not
knowing what to spend his money on, he had begun
collecting engravings, he came to a stop at painting, began
to take interest in it, and concentrated upon it the
unoccupied mass of desires which demanded satisfaction.
He had a ready appreciation of art, and probably, with
a taste for imitating art, he supposed himself to have the
real thing essential for an artist, and after hesitating for
some time which style of painting to select—religious,
Anna Karenina
1012 of 1759
historical, realistic, or genre painting—he set to work to
paint. He appreciated all kinds, and could have felt
inspired by any one of them; but he had no conception of
the possibility of knowing nothing at all of any school of
painting, and of being inspired directly by what is within
the soul, without caring whether what is painted will
belong to any recognized school. Since he knew nothing
of this, and drew his inspiration, not directly from life, but
indirectly from life embodied in art, his inspiration came
very quickly and easily, and as quickly and easily came his
success in painting something very similar to the sort of
painting he was trying to imitate.
More than any other style he liked the French—
graceful and effective—and in that style he began to paint
Anna’s portrait in Italian costume, and the portrait seemed
to him, and to everyone who saw it, extremely successful.
Anna Karenina
1013 of 1759
Chapter 9
The old neglected palazzo, with its lofty carved ceilings
and frescoes on the walls, with its floors of mosaic, with its
heavy yellow stuff curtains on the windows, with its vases
on pedestals, and its open fireplaces, its carved doors and
gloomy reception rooms, hung with pictures—this palazzo
did much, by its very appearance after they had moved
into it, to confirm in Vronsky the agreeable illusion that
he was not so much a Russian country gentleman, a
retired army officer, as an enlightened amateur and patron
of the arts, himself a modest artist who had renounced the
world, his connections, and his ambition for the sake of
the woman he loved.
The pose chosen by Vronsky with their removal into
the palazzo was completely successful, and having, through
Golenishtchev, made acquaintance with a few interesting
people, for a time he was satisfied. He painted studies from
nature under the guidance of an Italian professor of
painting, and studied medieval Italian life. Medieval Italian
life so fascinated Vronsky that he even wore a hat and
flung a cloak over his shoulder in the medieval style,
which, indeed, was extremely becoming to him.
Anna Karenina
1014 of 1759
‘Here we live, and know nothing of what’s going on,’
Vronsky said to Golenishtchev as he came to see him one
morning. ‘Have you seen Mihailov’s picture?’ he said,
handing him a Russian gazette he had received that
morning, and pointing to an article on a Russian artist,
living in the very same town, and just finishing a picture
which had long been talked about, and had been bought
beforehand. The article reproached the government and
the academy for letting so remarkable an artist be left
without encouragement and support.
‘I’ve seen it,’ answered Golenishtchev. ‘Of course, he’s
not without talent, but it’s all in a wrong direction. It’s all
the Ivanov-Strauss-Renan attitude to Christ and to
religious painting.’
‘What is the subject of the picture?’ asked Anna.
‘Christ before Pilate. Christ is represented as a Jew with
all the realism of the new school.’
And the question of the subject of the picture having
brought him to one of his favorite theories, Golenishtchev
launched forth into a disquisition on it.
‘I can’t understand how they can fall into such a gross
mistake. Christ always has His definite embodiment in the
art of the great masters. And therefore, if they want to
depict, not God, but a revolutionist or a sage, let them
Anna Karenina
1015 of 1759
take from history a Socrates, a Franklin, a Charlotte
Corday, but not Christ. They take the very figure which
cannot be taken for their art, and then..’
‘And is it true that this Mihailov is in such poverty?’
asked Vronsky, thinking that, as a Russian Maecenas, it
was his duty to assist the artist regardless of whether the
picture were good or bad.
‘I should say not. He’s a remarkable portrait-painter.
Have you ever seen his portrait of Madame
Vassiltchikova? But I believe he doesn’t care about
painting any more portraits, and so very likely he is in
want. I maintain that..’
‘Couldn’t we ask him to paint a portrait of Anna
Arkadyevna?’ said Vronsky.
‘Why mine?’ said Anna. ‘After yours I don’t want
another portrait. Better have one of Annie’ (so she called
her baby girl). ‘Here she is,’ she added, looking out of the
window at the handsome Italian nurse, who was carrying
the child out into the garden, and immediately glancing
unnoticed at Vronsky. The handsome nurse, from whom
Vronsky was painting a head for his picture, was the one
hidden grief in Anna’s life. He painted with her as his
model, admired her beauty and medievalism, and Anna
dared not confess to herself that she was afraid of
Anna Karenina
1016 of 1759
becoming jealous of this nurse, and was for that reason
particularly gracious and condescending both to her and
her little son. Vronsky, too, glanced out of the window
and into Anna’s eyes, and, turning at once to
Golenishtchev, he said:
‘Do you know this Mihailov?’
‘I have met him. But he’s a queer fish, and quite
without breeding. You know, one of those uncouth new
people one’s so often coming across nowadays, One of
those free-thinkers you know, who are reared d’emblee in
theories of atheism, scepticism, and materialism. In former
days,’ said Golenishtchev, not observing, or not willing to
observe, that both Anna and Vronsky wanted to speak, ‘in
former days the free-thinker was a man who had been
brought up in ideas of religion, law, and morality, and
only through conflict and struggle came to free-thought;
but now there has sprung up a new type of born freethinkers who grow up without even having heard of
principles of morality or of religion, of the existence of
authorities, who grow up directly in ideas of negation in
everything, that is to say, savages. Well, he’s of that class.
He’s the son, it appears, of some Moscow butler, and has
never had any sort of bringing-up. When he got into the
academy and made his reputation he tried, as he’s no fool,
Anna Karenina
1017 of 1759
to educate himself. And he turned to what seemed to him
the very source of culture—the magazines. In old times,
you see, a man who wanted to educate himself—a
Frenchman, for instance—would have set to work to
study all the classics and theologians and tragedians and
historiaris and philosophers, and, you know, all the
intellectual work that came in his way. But in our day he
goes straight for the literature of negation, very quickly
assimilates all the extracts of the science of negation, and
he’s ready. And that’s not all—twenty years ago he would
have found in that literature traces of conflict with
authorities, with the creeds of the ages; he would have
perceived from this conflict that there was something else;
but now he comes at once upon a literature in which the
old creeds do not even furnish matter for discussion, but it
is stated baldly that there is nothing else—evolution,
natural selection, struggle for existence—and that’s all. In
my article I’ve..’
‘I tell you what,’ said Anna, who had for a long while
been exchanging wary glances with Vronsky, and knew
that he was not in the least interested in the education of
this artist, but was simply absorbed by the idea of assisting
him, and ordering a portrait of him; ‘I tell you what,’ she
Anna Karenina
1018 of 1759
said, resolutely interrupting Golenishtchev, who was still
talking away, ‘let’s go and see him!’
Golenishtchev recovered his self-possession and readily
agreed. But as the artist lived in a remote suburb, it was
decided to take the carriage.
An hour later Anna, with Golenishtchev by her side
and Vronsky on the front seat of the carriage, facing them,
drove up to a new ugly house in the remote suburb. On
learning from the porter’s wife, who came out to them,
that Mihailov saw visitors at his studio, but that at that
moment he was in his lodging only a couple of steps off,
they sent her to him with their cards, asking permission to
see his picture.
Anna Karenina
1019 of 1759
Chapter 10
The artist Mihailov was, as always, at work when the
cards of Count Vronsky and Golenishtchev were brought
to him. In the morning he had been working in his studio
at his big picture. On getting home he flew into a rage
with his wife for not having managed to put off the
landlady, who had been asking for money.
‘I’ve said it to you twenty times, don’t enter into
details. You’re fool enough at all times, and when you
start explaining things in Italian you’re a fool three times as
foolish,’ he said after a long dispute.
‘Don’t let it run so long; it’s not my fault. If I had the
money..’
‘Leave me in peace, for God’s sake!’ Mihailov shrieked,
with tears in his voice, and, stopping his ears, he went off
into his working room, the other side of a partition wall,
and closed the door after him. ‘Idiotic woman!’ he said to
himself, sat down to the table, and, opening a portfolio, he
set to work at once with peculiar fervor at a sketch he had
begun.
Never did he work with such fervor and success as
when things went ill with him, and especially when he
Anna Karenina
1020 of 1759
quarreled with his wife. ‘Oh! damn them all!’ he thought
as he went on working. He was making a sketch for the
figure of a man in a violent rage. A sketch had been made
before, but he was dissatisfied with it. ‘No, that one was
better...where is it?’ He went back to his wife, and
scowling, and not looking at her, asked his eldest little girl,
where was that piece of paper he had given them? The
paper with the discarded sketch on it was found, but it was
dirty, and spotted with candle-grease. Still, he took the
sketch, laid it on his table, and, moving a little away,
screwing up his eyes, he fell to gazing at it. All at once he
smiled and gesticulated gleefully.
‘That’s it! that’s it!’ he said, and, at once picking up the
pencil, he began rapidly drawing. The spot of tallow had
given the man a new pose.
He had sketched this new pose, when all at once he
recalled the face of a shopkeeper of whom he had bought
cigars, a vigorous face with a prominent chin, and he
sketched this very face, this chin on to the figure of the
man. He laughed aloud with delight. The figure from a
lifeless imagined thing had become living, and such that it
could never be changed. That figure lived, and was clearly
and unmistakably defined. The sketch might be corrected
in accordance with the requirements of the figure, the
Anna Karenina
1021 of 1759
legs, indeed, could and must be put differently, and the
position of the left hand must be quite altered; the hair too
might be thrown back. But in making these corrections he
was not altering the figure but simply getting rid of what
concealed the figure. He was, as it were, stripping off the
wrappings which hindered it from being distinctly seen.
Each new feature only brought out the whole figure in all
its force and vigor, as it had suddenly come to him from
the spot of tallow. He was carefully finishing the figure
when the cards were brought him.
‘Coming, coming!’
He went in to his wife.
‘Come, Sasha, don’t be cross!’ he said, smiling timidly
and affectionately at her. ‘You were to blame. I was to
blame. I’ll make it all right.’ And having made peace with
his wife he put on an olive-green overcoat with a velvet
collar and a hat, and went towards his studio. The
successful figure he had already forgotten. Now he was
delighted and excited at the visit of these people of
consequence, Russians, who had come in their carriage.
Of his picture, the one that stood now on his easel, he
had at the bottom of his heart one conviction—that no
one had ever painted a picture like it. He did not believe
that his picture was better than all the pictures of Raphael,
Anna Karenina
1022 of 1759
but he knew that what he tried to convey in that picture,
no one ever had conveyed. This he knew positively, and
had known a long while, ever since he had begun to paint
it. But other people’s criticisms, whatever they might be,
had yet immense consequence in his eyes, and they
agitated him to the depths of his soul. Any remark, the
most insignificant, that showed that the critic saw even the
tiniest part of what he saw in the picture, agitated him to
the depths of his soul. He always attributed to his critics a
more profound comprehension than he had himself, and
always expected from them something he did not himself
see in the picture. And often in their criticisms he fancied
that he had found this.
He walked rapidly to the door of his studio, and in
spite of his excitement he was struck by the soft light on
Anna’s figure as she stood in the shade of the entrance
listening to Golenishtchev, who was eagerly telling her
something, while she evidently wanted to look round at
the artist. He was himself unconscious how, as he
approached them, he seized on this impression and
absorbed it, as he had the chin of the shopkeeper who had
sold him the cigars, and put it away somewhere to be
brought out when he wanted it. The visitors, not
agreeably impressed beforehand by Golenishtchev’s
Anna Karenina
1023 of 1759
account of the artist, were still less so by his personal
appearance. Thick-set and of middle height, with nimble
movements, with his brown hat, olive-green coat and
narrow trousers—though wide trousers had been a long
while in fashion,—most of all, with the ordinariness of his
broad face, and the combined expression of timidity and
anxiety to keep up his dignity, Mihailov made an
unpleasant impression.
‘Please step in,’ he said, trying to look indifferent, and
going into the passage he took a key out of his pocket and
opened the door.
Anna Karenina
1024 of 1759
Chapter 11
On entering the studio, Mihailov once more scanned
his visitors and noted down in his imagination Vronsky’s
expression too, and especially his jaws. Although his
artistic sense was unceasingly at work collecting materials,
although he felt a continually increasing excitement as the
moment of criticizing his work drew nearer, he rapidly
and subtly formed, from imperceptible signs, a mental
image of these three persons.
That fellow (Golenishtchev) was a Russian living here.
Mihailov did not remember his surname nor where he had
met him, nor what he had said to him. He only
remembered his face as he remembered all the faces he had
ever seen; but he remembered, too, that it was one of the
faces laid by in his memory in the immense class of the
falsely consequential and poor in expression. The abundant
hair and very open forehead gave an appearance of
consequence to the face, which had only one expression—
a petty, childish, peevish expression, concentrated just
above the bridge of the narrow nose. Vronsky and
Madame Karenina must be, Mihailov supposed,
distinguished and wealthy Russians, knowing nothing
Anna Karenina
1025 of 1759
about art, like all those wealthy Russians, but posing as
amateurs and connoisseurs. ‘Most likely they’ve already
looked at all the antiques, and now they’re making the
round of the studios of the new people, the German
humbug, and the cracked Pre-Raphaelite English fellow,
and have only come to me to make the point of view
complete,’ he thought. He was well acquainted with the
way dilettanti have (the cleverer they were the worse he
found them) of looking at the works of contemporary
artists with the sole object of being in a position to say that
art is a thing of the past, and that the more one sees of the
new men the more one sees how inimitable the works of
the great old masters have remained. He expected all this;
he saw it all in their faces, he saw it in the careless
indifference with which they talked among themselves,
stared at the lay figures and busts, and walked about in
leisurely fashion, waiting for him to uncover his picture.
But in spite of this, while he was turning over his studies,
pulling up the blinds and taking off the sheet, he was in
intense excitement, especially as, in spite of his conviction
that all distinguished and wealthy Russians were certain to
be beasts and fools, he liked Vronsky, and still more Anna.
‘Here, if you please,’ he said, moving on one side with
his nimble gait and pointing to his picture, ‘it’s the
Anna Karenina
1026 of 1759
exhortation to Pilate. Matthew, chapter xxvii,’ he said,
feeling his lips were beginning to tremble with emotion.
He moved away and stood behind them.
For the few seconds during which the visitors were
gazing at the picture in silence Mihailov too gazed at it
with the indifferent eye of an outsider. For those few
seconds he was sure in anticipation that a higher, juster
criticism would be uttered by them, by those very visitors
whom he had been so despising a moment before. He
forgot all he had thought about his picture before during
the three years he had been painting it; he forgot all its
qualities which had been absolutely certain to him—he
saw the picture with their indifferent, new, outside eyes,
and saw nothing good in it. He saw in the foreground
Pilate’s irritated face and the serene face of Christ, and in
the background the figures of Pilate’s retinue and the face
of John watching what was happening. Every face that,
with such agony, such blunders and corrections had grown
up within him with its special character, every face that
had given him such torments and such raptures, and all
these faces so many times transposed for the sake of the
harmony of the whole, all the shades of color and tones
that he had attained with such labor—all of this together
seemed to him now, looking at it with their eyes, the
Anna Karenina
1027 of 1759
merest vulgarity, something that had been done a
thousand times over. The face dearest to him, the face of
Christ, the center of the picture, which had given him
such ecstasy as it unfolded itself to him, was utterly lost to
him when he glanced at the picture with their eyes. He
saw a well-painted (no, not even that—he distinctly saw
now a mass of defects) repetition of those endless Christs
of Titian, Raphael, Rubens, and the same soldiers and
Pilate. It was all common, poor, and stale, and positively
badly painted—weak and unequal. They would be
justified in repeating hypocritically civil speeches in the
presence of the painter, and pitying him and laughing at
him when they were alone again.
The silence (though it lasted no more than a minute)
became too intolerable to him. To break it, and to show
he was not agitated, he made an effort and addressed
Golenishtchev.
‘I think I’ve had the pleasure of meeting you,’ he said,
looking uneasily first at Anna, then at Vronsky, in fear of
losing any shade of their expression.
‘To be sure! We met at Rossi’s, do you remember, at
that soiree when that Italian lady recited—the new
Rachel?’ Golenishtchev answered easily, removing his eyes
Anna Karenina
1028 of 1759
without the slightest regret from the picture and turning
to the artist.
Noticing, however, that Mihailov was expecting a
criticism of the picture, he said:
‘Your picture has got on a great deal since I saw it last
time; and what strikes me particularly now, as it did then,
is the figure of Pilate. One so knows the man: a goodnatured, capital fellow, but an official through and
through, who does not know what it is he’s doing. But I
fancy..’
All Mihailov’s mobile face beamed at once; his eyes
sparkled. He tried to say something, but he could not
speak for excitement, and pretended to be coughing. Low
as was his opinion of Golenishtchev’s capacity for
understanding art, trifling as was the true remark upon the
fidelity of the expression of Pilate as an official, and
offensive as might have seemed the utterance of so
unimportant an observation while nothing was said of
more serious points, Mihailov was in an ecstasy of delight
at this observation. He had himself thought about Pilate’s
figure just what Golenishtchev said. The fact that this
reflection was but one of millions of reflections, which as
Mihailov knew for certain would be true, did not
diminish for him the significance of Golenishtchev’s
Anna Karenina
1029 of 1759
remark. His heart warmed to Golenishtchev for this
remark, and from a state of depression he suddenly passed
to ecstasy. At once the whole of his picture lived before
him in all the indescribable complexity of everything
living. Mihailov again tried to say that that was how he
understood Pilate, but his lips quivered intractably, and he
could not pronounce the words. Vronsky and Anna too
said something in that subdued voice in which, partly to
avoid hurting the artist’s feelings and partly to avoid saying
out loud something silly—so easily said when talking of
art—people usually speak at exhibitions of pictures.
Mihailov fancied that the picture had made an impression
on them too. He went up to them.
‘How marvelous Christ’s expression is!’ said Anna. Of
all she saw she liked that expression most of all, and she
felt that it was the center of the picture, and so praise of it
would be pleasant to the artist. ‘One can see that He is
pitying Pilate.’
This again was one of the million true reflections that
could be found in his picture and in the figure of Christ.
She said that He was pitying Pilate. In Christ’s expression
there ought to be indeed an expression of pity, since there
is an expression of love, of heavenly peace, of readiness for
death, and a sense of the vanity of words. Of course there
Anna Karenina
1030 of 1759
is the expression of an official in Pilate and of pity in
Christ, seeing that one is the incarnation of the fleshly and
the other of the spiritual life. All this and much more
flashed into Mihailov’s thoughts.
‘Yes, and how that figure is done—what atmosphere!
One can walk round it,’ said Golenishtchev, unmistakably
betraying by this remark that he did not approve of the
meaning and idea of the figure.
‘Yes, there’s a wonderful mastery!’ said Vronsky. ‘How
those figures in the background stand out! There you have
technique,’ he said, addressing Golenishtchev, alluding to a
conversation between them about Vronsky’s despair of
attaining this technique.
‘Yes, yes, marvelous!’ Golenishtchev and Anna
assented. In spite of the excited condition in which he
was, the sentence about technique had sent a pang to
Mihailov’s heart, and looking angrily at Vronsky he
suddenly scowled. He had often heard this word
technique, and was utterly unable to understand what was
understood by it. He knew that by this term was
understood a mechanical facility for painting or drawing,
entirely apart from its subject. He had noticed often that
even in actual praise technique was opposed to essential
quality, as though one could paint well something that was
Anna Karenina
1031 of 1759
bad. He knew that a great deal of attention and care was
necessary in taking off the coverings, to avoid injuring the
creation itself, and to take off all the coverings; but there
was no art of painting—no technique of any sort—about
it. If to a little child or to his cook were revealed what he
saw, it or she would have been able to peel the wrappings
off what was seen. And the most experienced and adroit
painter could not by mere mechanical facility paint
anything if the lines of the subject were not revealed to
him first. Besides, he saw that if it came to talking about
technique, it was impossible to praise him for it. In all he
had painted and repainted he saw faults that hurt his eyes,
coming from want of care in taking off the wrappings—
faults he could not correct now without spoiling the
whole. And in almost all the figures and faces he saw, too,
remnants of the wrappings not perfectly removed that
spoiled the picture.
‘One thing might be said, if you will allow me to make
the remark...’ observed Golenishtchev.
‘Oh, I shall be delighted, I beg you,’ said Mihailov with
a forced smile.
‘That is, that you make Him the man-god, and not the
God-man. But I know that was what you meant to do.’
Anna Karenina
1032 of 1759
‘I cannot paint a Christ that is not in my heart,’ said
Mihailov gloomily.
‘Yes; but in that case, if you will allow me to say what I
think.... Your picture is so fine that my observation cannot
detract from it, and, besides, it is only my personal
opinion. With you it is different. Your very motive is
different. But let us take Ivanov. I imagine that if Christ is
brought down to the level of an historical character, it
would have been better for Ivanov to select some other
historical subject, fresh, untouched.’
‘But if this is the greatest subject presented to art?’
‘If one looked one would find others. But the point is
that art cannot suffer doubt and discussion. And before the
picture of Ivanov the question arises for the believer and
the unbeliever alike, ‘Is it God, or is it not God?’ and the
unity of the impression is destroyed.’
‘Why so? I think that for educated people,’ said
Mihailov, ‘the question cannot exist.’
Golenishtchev did not agree with this, and confounded
Mihailov by his support of his first idea of the unity of the
impression being essential to art.
Mihailov was greatly perturbed, but he could say
nothing in defense of his own idea.
Anna Karenina
1033 of 1759
Chapter 12
Anna and Vronsky had long been exchanging glances,
regretting their friend’s flow of cleverness. At last Vronsky,
without waiting for the artist, walked away to another
small picture.
‘Oh, how exquisite! What a lovely thing! A gem! How
exquisite!’ they cried with one voice.
‘What is it they’re so pleased with?’ thought Mihailov.
He had positively forgotten that picture he had painted
three years ago. He had forgotten all the agonies and the
ecstasies he had lived through with that picture when for
several months it had been the one thought haunting him
day and night. He had forgotten, as he always forgot, the
pictures he had finished. He did not even like to look at it,
and had only brought it out because he was expecting an
Englishman who wanted to buy it.
‘Oh, that’s only an old study,’ he said.
‘How fine!’ said Golenishtchev, he too, with
unmistakable sincerity, falling under the spell of the
picture.
Two boys were angling in the shade of a willow-tree.
The elder had just dropped in the hook, and was carefully
Anna Karenina
1034 of 1759
pulling the float from behind a bush, entirely absorbed in
what he was doing. The other, a little younger, was lying
in the grass leaning on his elbows, with his tangled, flaxen
head in his hands, staring at the water with his dreamy
blue eyes. What was he thinking of?
The enthusiasm over this picture stirred some of the
old feeling for it in Mihailov, but he feared and disliked
this waste of feeling for things past, and so, even though
this praise was grateful to him, he tried to draw his visitors
away to a third picture.
But Vronsky asked whether the picture was for sale. To
Mihailov at that moment, excited by visitors, it was
extremely distasteful to speak of money matters.
‘It is put up there to be sold,’ he answered, scowling
gloomily.
When the visitors had gone, Mihailov sat down
opposite the picture of Pilate and Christ, and in his mind
went over what had been said, and what, though not said,
had been implied by those visitors. And, strange to say,
what had had such weight with him, while they were
there and while he mentally put himself at their point of
view, suddenly lost all importance for him. He began to
look at his picture with all his own full artist vision, and
was soon in that mood of conviction of the perfectibility,
Anna Karenina
1035 of 1759
and so of the significance, of his picture—a conviction
essential to the most intense fervor, excluding all other
interests—in which alone he could work.
Christ’s foreshortened leg was not right, though. He
took his palette and began to work. As he corrected the
leg he looked continually at the figure of John in the
background, which his visitors had not even noticed, but
which he knew was beyond perfection. When he had
finished the leg he wanted to touch that figure, but he felt
too much excited for it. He was equally unable to work
when he was cold and when he was too much affected
and saw everything too much. There was only one stage
in the transition from coldness to inspiration, at which
work was possible. Today he was too much agitated. He
would have covered the picture, but he stopped, holding
the cloth in his hand, and, smiling blissfully, gazed a long
while at the figure of John. At last, as it were regretfully
tearing himself away, he dropped the cloth, and, exhausted
but happy, went home.
Vronsky, Anna, and Golenishtchev, on their way
home, were particularly lively and cheerful. They talked of
Mihailov and his pictures. The word talent, by which they
meant an inborn, almost physical, aptitude apart from
brain and heart, and in which they tried to find an
Anna Karenina
1036 of 1759
expression for all the artist had gained from life, recurred
particularly often in their talk, as though it were necessary
for them to sum up what they had no conception of,
though they wanted to talk of it. They said that there was
no denying his talent, but that his talent could not develop
for want of education—the common defect of our
Russian artists. But the picture of the boys had imprinted
itself on their memories, and they were continually
coming back to it. ‘What an exquisite thing! How he has
succeeded in it, and how simply! He doesn’t even
comprehend how good it is. Yes, I mustn’t let it slip; I
must buy it,’ said Vronsky.
Anna Karenina
1037 of 1759
Chapter 13
Mihailov sold Vronsky his picture, and agreed to paint
a portrait of Anna. On the day fixed he came and began
the work.
From the fifth sitting the portrait impressed everyone,
especially Vronsky, not only by its resemblance, but by its
characteristic beauty. It was strange how Mihailov could
have discovered just her characteristic beauty. ‘One needs
to know and love her as I have loved her to discover the
very sweetest expression of her soul,’ Vronsky thought,
though it was only from this portrait that he had himself
learned this sweetest expression of her soul. But the
expression was so true that he, and others too, fancied
they had long known it.
‘I have been struggling on for ever so long without
doing anything,’ he said of his own portrait of her, ‘and he
just looked and painted it. That’s where technique comes
in.’
‘That will come,’ was the consoling reassurance given
him by Golenishtchev, in whose view Vronsky had both
talent, and what was most important, culture, giving him a
wider outlook on art. Golenishtchev’s faith in Vronsky’s
Anna Karenina
1038 of 1759
talent was propped up by his own need of Vronsky’s
sympathy and approval for his own articles and ideas, and
he felt that the praise and support must be mutual.
In another man’s house, and especially in Vronsky’s
palazzo, Mihailov was quite a different man from what he
was in his studio. He behaved with hostile courtesy, as
though he were afraid of coming closer to people he did
not respect. He called Vronsky ‘your excellency,’ and
notwithstanding Anna’s and Vronsky’s invitations, he
would never stay to dinner, nor come except for the
sittings. Anna was even more friendly to him than to other
people, and was very grateful for her portrait. Vronsky was
more than cordial with him, and was obviously interested
to know the artist’s opinion of his picture. Golenishtchev
never let slip an opportunity of instilling sound ideas about
art into Mihailov. But Mihailov remained equally chilly to
all of them. Anna was aware from his eyes that he liked
looking at her, but he avoided conversation with her.
Vronsky’s talk about his painting he met with stubborn
silence, and he was as stubbornly silent when he was
shown Vronsky’s picture. He was unmistakably bored by
Golenishtchev’s conversation, and he did not attempt to
oppose
him.
Anna Karenina
1039 of 1759
Altogether Mihailov, with his reserved and
disagreeable, as it were, hostile attitude, was quite disliked
by them as they got to know him better; and they were
glad when the sittings were over, and they were left with a
magnificent portrait in their possession, and he gave up
coming. Golenishtchev was the first to give expression to
an idea that had occurred to all of them, which was that
Mihailov was simply jealous of Vronsky.
‘Not envious, let us say, since he has talent; but it
annoys him that a wealthy man of the highest society, and
a count, too (you know they all detest a title), can,
without any particular trouble, do as well, if not better,
than he who has devoted all his life to it. And more than
all, it’s a question of culture, which he is without.’
Vronsky defended Mihailov, but at the bottom of his
heart he believed it, because in his view a man of a
different, lower world would be sure to be envious.
Anna’s portrait—the same subject painted from nature
both by him and by Mihailov—ought to have shown
Vronsky the difference between him and Mihailov; but he
did not see it. Only after Mihailov’s portrait was painted
he left off painting his portrait of Anna, deciding that it
was now not needed. His picture of medieval life he went
on with. And he himself, and Golenishtchev, and still
Anna Karenina
1040 of 1759
more Anna, thought it very good, because it was far more
like the celebrated pictures they knew than Mihailov’s
picture.
Mihailov meanwhile, although Anna’s portrait greatly
fascinated him, was even more glad than they were when
the sittings were over, and he had no longer to listen to
Golenishtchev’s disquisitions upon art, and could forget
about Vronsky’s painting. He knew that Vronsky could
not be prevented from amusing himself with painting; he
knew that he and all dilettanti had a perfect right to paint
what they liked, but it was distasteful to him. A man could
not be prevented from making himself a big wax doll, and
kissing it. But if the man were to come with the doll and
sit before a man in love, and begin caressing his doll as the
lover caressed the woman he loved, it would be distasteful
to the lover. Just such a distasteful sensation was what
Mihailov felt at the sight of Vronsky’s painting: he felt it
both ludicrous and irritating, both pitiable and offensive.
Vronsky’s interest in painting and the Middle Ages did
not last long. He had enough taste for painting to be
unable to finish his picture. The picture came to a
standstill. He was vaguely aware that its defects,
inconspicuous at first, would be glaring if he were to go
on with it. The same experience befell him as
Anna Karenina
1041 of 1759
Golenishtchev, who felt that he had nothing to say, and
continually deceived himself with the theory that his idea
was not yet mature, that he was working it out and
collecting materials. This exasperated and tortured
Golenishtchev, but Vronsky was incapable of deceiving
and torturing himself, and even more incapable of
exasperation. With his characteristic decision, without
explanation or apology, he simply ceased working at
painting.
But without this occupation, the life of Vronsky and of
Anna, who wondered at his loss of interest in it, struck
them as intolerably tedious in an Italian town. The palazzo
suddenly seemed so obtrusively old and dirty, the spots on
the curtains, the cracks in the floors, the broken plaster on
the cornices became so disagreeably obvious, and the
everlasting sameness of Golenishtchev, and the Italian
professor and the German traveler became so wearisome,
that they had to make some change. They resolved to go
to Russia, to the country. In Petersburg Vronsky intended
to arrange a partition of the land with his brother, while
Anna meant to see her son. The summer they intended to
spend on Vronsky’s great family estate.
Anna Karenina
1042 of 1759
Chapter 14
Levin had been married three months. He was happy,
but not at all in the way he had expected to be. At every
step he found his former dreams disappointed, and new,
unexpected surprises of happiness. He was happy; but on
entering upon family life he saw at every step that it was
utterly different from what he had imagined. At every step
he experienced what a man would experience who, after
admiring the smooth, happy course of a little boat on a
lake, should get himself into that little boat. He saw that it
was not all sitting still, floating smoothly; that one had to
think too, not for an instant to forget where one was
floating; and that there was water under one, and that one
must row; and that his unaccustomed hands would be
sore; and that it was only to look at it that was easy; but
that doing it, though very delightful, was very difficult.
As a bachelor, when he had watched other people’s
married life, seen the petty cares, the squabbles, the
jealousy, he had only smiled contemptuously in his heart.
In his future married life there could be, he was
convinced, nothing of that sort; even the external forms,
indeed, he fancied, must be utterly unlike the life of others
Anna Karenina
1043 of 1759
in everything. And all of a sudden, instead of his life with
his wife being made on an individual pattern, it was, on
the contrary, entirely made up of the pettiest details,
which he had so despised before, but which now, by no
will of his own, had gained an extraordinary importance
that it was useless to contend against. And Levin saw that
the organization of all these details was by no means so
easy as he had fancied before. Although Levin believed
himself to have the most exact conceptions of domestic
life, unconsciously, like all men, he pictured domestic life
as the happiest enjoyment of love, with nothing to hinder
and no petty cares to distract. He ought, as he conceived
the position, to do his work, and to find repose from it in
the happiness of love. She ought to be beloved, and
nothing more. But, like all men, he forgot that she too
would want work. And he was surprised that she, his
poetic, exquisite Kitty, could, not merely in the first
weeks, but even in the first days of their married life,
think, remember, and busy herself about tablecloths, and
furniture, about mattresses for visitors, about a tray, about
the cook, and the dinner, and so on. While they were still
engaged, he had been struck by the definiteness with
which she had declined the tour abroad and decided to go
into the country, as though she knew of something she
Anna Karenina
1044 of 1759
wanted, and could still think of something outside her
love. This had jarred upon him then, and now her trivial
cares and anxieties jarred upon him several times. But he
saw that this was essential for her. And, loving her as he
did, though he did not understand the reason of them, and
jeered at these domestic pursuits, he could not help
admiring them. He jeered at the way in which she
arranged the furniture they had brought from Moscow;
rearranged their room; hung up curtains; prepared rooms
for visitors; a room for Dolly; saw after an abode for her
new maid; ordered dinner of the old cook; came into
collision with Agafea Mihalovna, taking from her the
charge of the stores. He saw how the old cook smiled,
admiring her, and listening to her inexperienced,
impossible orders, how mournfully and tenderly Agafea
Mihalovna shook her head over the young mistress’s new
arrangements. He saw that Kitty was extraordinarily sweet
when, laughing and crying, she came to tell him that her
maid, Masha, was used to looking upon her as her young
lady, and so no one obeyed her. It seemed to him sweet,
but strange, and he thought it would have been better
without this.
He did not know how great a sense of change she was
experiencing; she, who at home had sometimes wanted
Anna Karenina
1045 of 1759
some favorite dish, or sweets, without the possibility of
getting either, now could order what she liked, buy
pounds of sweets, spend as much money as she liked, and
order any puddings she pleased.
She was dreaming with delight now of Dolly’s coming
to them with her children, especially because she would
order for the children their favorite puddings and Dolly
would appreciate all her new housekeeping. She did not
know herself why and wherefore, but the arranging of her
house had an irresistible attraction for her. Istinctively
feeling the approach of spring, and knowing that there
would be days of rough weather too, she built her nest as
best she could, and was in haste at the same time to build
it and to learn how to do it.
This care for domestic details in Kitty, so opposed to
Levin’s ideal of exalted happiness, was at first one of the
disappointments; and this sweet care of her household, the
aim of which he did not understand, but could not help
loving, was one of the new happy surprises.
Another disappointment and happy surprise came in
their quarrels. Levin could never have conceived that
between him and his wife any relations could arise other
than tender, respectful and loving, and all at once in the
very early days they quarreled, so that she said he did not
Anna Karenina
1046 of 1759
care for her, that he cared for no one but himself, burst
into tears, and wrung her arms.
This first quarrel arose from Levin’s having gone out to
a new farmhouse and having been away half an hour too
long, because he had tried to get home by a short cut and
had lost his way. He drove home thinking of nothing but
her, of her love, of his own happiness, and the nearer he
drew to home, the warmer was his tenderness for her. He
ran into the room with the same feeling, with an even
stronger feeling than he had had when he reached the
Shtcherbatskys’ house to make his offer. And suddenly he
was met by a lowering expression he had never seen in
her. He would have kissed her; she pushed him away.
‘What is it?’
‘You’ve been enjoying yourself,’ she began, trying to
be calm and spiteful. But as soon as she opened her
mouth, a stream of reproach, of senseless jealousy, of all
that had been torturing her during that half hour which
she had spent sitting motionless at the window, burst from
her. It was only then, for the first time, that he clearly
understood what he had not understood when he led her
out of the church after the wedding. He felt now that he
was not simply close to her, but that he did not know
where he ended and she began. He felt this from the
Anna Karenina
1047 of 1759
agonizing sensation of division that he experienced at that
instant. He was offended for the first instant, but the very
same second he felt that he could not be offended by her,
that she was himself. He felt for the first moment as a man
feels when, having suddenly received a violent blow from
behind, he turns round, angry and eager to avenge
himself, to look for his antagonist, and finds that it is he
himself who has accidentally struck himself, that there is
no one to be angry with, and that he must put up with
and try to soothe the pain.
Never afterwards did he feel it with such intensity, but
this first time he could not for a long while get over it. His
natural feeling urged him to defend himself, to prove to
her she was wrong; but to prove her wrong would mean
irritating her still more and making the rupture greater that
was the cause of all his suffering. One habitual feeling
impelled him to get rid of the blame and to pass it on her.
Another feeling, even stronger, impelled him as quickly as
possible to smooth over the rupture without letting it
grow greater. To remain under such undeserved reproach
was wretched, but to make her suffer by justifying himself
was worse still. Like a man half-awake in an agony of pain,
he wanted to tear out, to fling away the aching place, and
coming to his senses, he felt that the aching place was
Anna Karenina
1048 of 1759
himself. He could do nothing but try to help the aching
place to bear it, and this he tried to do.
They made peace. She, recognizing that she was
wrong, though she did not say so, became tenderer to
him, and they experienced new, redoubled happiness in
their love. But that did not prevent such quarrels from
happening again, and exceedingly often too, on the most
unexpected and trivial grounds. These quarrels frequently
arose from the fact that they did not yet know what was of
importance to each other and that all this early period they
were both often in a bad temper. When one was in a good
temper, and the other in a bad temper, the peace was not
broken; but when both happened to be in an ill-humor,
quarrels sprang up from such incomprehensibly trifling
causes, that they could never remember afterwards what
they had quarreled about. It is true that when they were
both in a good temper their enjoyment of life was
redoubled. But still this first period of their married life
was a difficult time for them.
During all this early time they had a peculiarly vivid
sense of tension, as it were, a tugging in opposite
directions of the chain by which they were bound.
Altogether their honeymoon—that is to say, the month
after their wedding—from which from tradition Levin
Anna Karenina
1049 of 1759
expected so much, was not merely not a time of
sweetness, but remained in the memories of both as the
bitterest and most humiliating period in their lives. They
both alike tried in later life to blot out from their
memories all the monstrous, shameful incidents of that
morbid period, when both were rarely in a normal frame
of mind, both were rarely quite themselves.
It was only in the third month of their married life,
after their return from Moscow, where they had been
staying for a month, that their life began to go more
smoothly.
Anna Karenina
1050 of 1759
Chapter 15
They had just come back from Moscow, and were glad
to be alone. He was sitting at the writing table in his
study, writing. She, wearing the dark lilac dress she had
worn during the first days of their married life, and put on
again today, a dress particularly remembered and loved by
him, was sitting on the sofa, the same old-fashioned
leather sofa which had always stood in the study in Levin’s
father’s and grandfather’s days. She was sewing at broderie
anglaise. He thought and wrote, never losing the happy
consciousness of her presence. His work, both on the land
and on the book, in which the principles of the new land
system were to be laid down, had not been abandoned;
but just as formerly these pursuits and ideas had seemed to
him petty and trivial in comparison with the darkness that
overspread all life, now they seemed as unimportant and
petty in comparison with the life that lay before him
suffused with the brilliant light of happiness. He went on
with his work, but he felt now that the center of gravity of
his attention had passed to something else, and that
consequently he looked at his work quite differently and
more clearly. Formerly this work had been for him an
Anna Karenina
1051 of 1759
escape from life. Formerly he had felt that without this
work his life would be too gloomy. Now these pursuits
were necessary for him that life might not be too
uniformly bright. Taking up his manuscript, reading
through what he had written, he found with pleasure that
the work was worth his working at. Many of his old ideas
seemed to him superfluous and extreme, but many blanks
became distinct to him when he reviewed the whole thing
in his memory. He was writing now a new chapter on the
causes of the present disastrous condition of agriculture in
Russia. He maintained that the poverty of Russia arises
not merely from the anomalous distribution of landed
property and misdirected reforms, but that what had
contributed of late years to this result was the civilization
from without abnormally grafted upon Russia, especially
facilities of communication, as railways, leading to
centralization in towns, the development of luxury, and
the consequent development of manufactures, credit and
its accompaniment of speculation—all to the detriment of
agriculture. It seemed to him that in a normal
development of wealth in a state all these phenomena
would arise only when a considerable amount of labor had
been put into agriculture, when it had come under
regular, or at least definite, conditions; that the wealth of a
Anna Karenina
1052 of 1759
country ought to increase proportionally, and especially in
such a way that other sources of wealth should not outstrip
agriculture; that in harmony with a certain stage of
agriculture there should be means of communication
corresponding to it, and that in our unsettled condition of
the land, railways, called into being by political and not by
economic needs, were premature, and instead of
promoting agriculture, as was expected of them, they were
competing with agriculture and promoting the
development of manufactures and credit, and so arresting
its progress; and that just as the one-sided and premature
development of one organ in an animal would hinder its
general development, so in the general development of
wealth in Russia, credit, facilities of communication,
manufacturing activity, indubitably necessary in Europe,
where they had arisen in their proper time, had with us
only done harm, by throwing into the background the
chief question calling for settlement—the question of the
organization of agriculture.
While he was writing his ideas she was thinking how
unnaturally cordial her husband had been to young Prince
Tcharsky, who had, with great want of tact, flirted with
her the day before they left Moscow. ‘He’s jealous,’ she
thought. ‘Goodness! how sweet and silly he is! He’s
Anna Karenina
1053 of 1759
jealous of me! If he knew that I think no more of them
than of Piotr the cook,’ she thought, looking at his head
and red neck with a feeling of possession strange to herself.
‘Though it’s a pity to take him from his work (but he has
plenty of time!), I must look at his face; will he feel I’m
looking at him? I wish he’d turn round...I’ll WILL him
to!’ and she opened her eyes wide, as though to intensify
the influence of her gaze.
‘Yes, they draw away all the sap and give a false
appearance of prosperity,’ he muttered, stopping to write,
and, feeling that she was looking at him and smiling, he
looked round.
‘Well?’ he queried, smiling, and getting up.
‘He looked round,’ she thought.
‘It’s nothing; I wanted you to look round,’ she said,
watching him, and trying to guess whether he was vexed
at being interrupted or not.
‘How happy we are alone together!—I am, that is,’ he
said, going up to her with a radiant smile of happiness.
‘I’m just as happy. I’ll never go anywhere, especially
not to Moscow.’
‘And what were you thinking about?’
Anna Karenina
1054 of 1759
‘I? I was thinking.... No, no, go along, go on writing;
don’t break off,’ she said, pursing up her lips, ‘and I must
cut out these little holes now, do you see?’
She took up her scissors and began cutting them out.
‘No; tell me, what was it?’ he said, sitting down beside
her and watching the tiny scissors moving round.
‘Oh! what was I thinking about? I was thinking about
Moscow, about the back of your head.’
‘Why should I, of all people, have such happiness! It’s
unnatural, too good,’ he said, kissing her hand.
‘I feel quite the opposite; the better things are, the
more natural it seems to me.’
‘And you’ve got a little curl loose,’ he said, carefully
turning her head round.
‘A little curl, oh yes. No, no, we are busy at our work!’
Work did not progress further, and they darted apart
from one another like culprits when Kouzma came in to
announce that tea was ready.
‘Have they come from the town?’ Levin asked
Kouzma.
‘They’ve just come; they’re unpacking the things.’
‘Come quickly,’ she said to him as she went out of the
study, ‘or else I shall read your letters without you.’
Anna Karenina
1055 of 1759
Left alone, after putting his manuscripts together in the
new portfolio bought by her, he washed his hands at the
new washstand with the elegant fittings, that had all made
their appearance with her. Levin smiled at his own
thoughts, and shook his head disapprovingly at those
thoughts; a feeling akin to remorse fretted him. There was
something shameful, effeminate, Capuan, as he called it to
himself, in his present mode of life. ‘It’s not right to go on
like this,’ he thought. ‘It’ll soon be three months, and I’m
doing next to nothing. Today, almost for the first time, I
set to work seriously, and what happened? I did nothing
but begin and throw it aside. Even my ordinary pursuits I
have almost given up. On the land I scarcely walk or drive
about at all to look after things. Either I am loath to leave
her, or I see she’s dull alone. And I used to think that,
before marriage, life was nothing much, somehow didn’t
count, but that after marriage, life began in earnest. And
here almost three months have passed, and I have spent
my time so idly and unprofitably. No, this won’t do; I
must begin. Of course, it’s not her fault. She’s not to
blame in any way. I ought myself to be firmer, to maintain
my masculine independence of action; or else I shall get
into such ways, and she’ll get used to them too.... Of
course she’s not to blame,’ he told himself.
Anna Karenina
1056 of 1759
But it is hard for anyone who is dissatisfied not to
blame someone else, and especially the person nearest of
all to him, for the ground of his dissatisfaction. And it
vaguely came into Levin’s mind that she herself was not to
blame (she could not be to blame for anything), but what
was to blame was her education, too superficial and
frivolous. ("That fool Tcharsky: she wanted, I know, to
stop him, but didn’t know how to.’) ‘Yes, apart from her
interest in the house (that she has), apart from dress and
broderie anglaise, she has no serious interests. No interest
in her work, in the estate, in the peasants, nor in music,
though she’s rather good at it, nor in reading. She does
nothing, and is perfectly satisfied.’ Levin, in his heart,
censured this, and did not as yet understand that she was
preparing for that period of activity which was to come for
her when she would at once be the wife of her husband
and mistress of the house, and would bear, and nurse, and
bring up children. He knew not that she was instinctively
aware of this, and preparing herself for this time of terrible
toil, did not reproach herself for the moments of
carelessness and happiness in her love that she enjoyed
now while gaily building her nest for the future.
Anna Karenina
1057 of 1759
Chapter 16
When Levin went upstairs, his wife was sitting near the
new silver samovar behind the new tea service, and,
having settled old Agafea Mihalovna at a little table with a
full cup of tea, was reading a letter from Dolly, with
whom they were in continual and frequent
correspondence.
‘You see, your good lady’s settled me here, told me to
sit a bit with her,’ said Agafea Mihalovna, smiling
affectionately at Kitty.
In these words of Agafea Mihalovna, Levin read the
final act of the drama which had been enacted of late
between her and Kitty. He saw that, in spite of Agafea
Mihalovna’s feelings being hurt by a new mistress taking
the reins of government out of her hands, Kitty had yet
conquered her and made her love her.
‘Here, I opened your letter too,’ said Kitty, handing
him an illiterate letter. ‘It’s from that woman, I think, your
brother’s...’ she said. ‘I did not read it through. This is
from my people and from Dolly. Fancy! Dolly took Tanya
and Grisha to a children’s ball at the Sarmatskys’: Tanya
was a French marquise.’
Anna Karenina
1058 of 1759
But Levin did not hear her. Flushing, he took the letter
from Marya Nikolaevna, his brother’s former mistress, and
began to read it. This was the second letter he had
received from Marya Nikolaevna. In the first letter, Marya
Nikolaevna wrote that his brother had sent her away for
no fault of hers, and, with touching simplicity, added that
though she was in want again, she asked for nothing, and
wished for nothing, but was only tormented by the
thought that Nikolay Dmitrievitch would come to grief
without her, owing to the weak state of his health, and
begged his brother to look after him. Now she wrote
quite differently. She had found Nikolay Dmitrievitch,
had again made it up with him in Moscow, and had
moved with him to a provincial town, where he had
received a post in the government service. But that he had
quarreled with the head official, and was on his way back
to Moscow, only he had been taken so ill on the road that
it was doubtful if he would ever leave his bed again, she
wrote. ‘It’s always of you he has talked, and, besides, he
has no more money left.’
‘Read this; Dolly writes about you,’ Kitty was
beginning, with a smile; but she stopped suddenly,
noticing the changed expression on her husband’s face.
‘What is it? What’s the matter?’
Anna Karenina
1059 of 1759
‘she writes to me that Nikolay, my brother, is at death’s
door. I shall go to him.’
Kitty’s face changed at once. Thoughts of Tanya as a
marquise, of Dolly, all had vanished.
‘When are you going?’ she said.
‘Tomorrow.’
‘And I will go with you, can I?’ she said.
‘Kitty! What are you thinking of?’ he said
reproachfully.
‘How do you mean?’ offended that he should seem to
take her suggestion unwillingly and with vexation. ‘Why
shouldn’t I go? I shan’t be in your way. I..’
‘I’m going because my brother is dying,’ said Levin.
‘Why should you..’
‘Why? For the same reason as you.’
‘And, at a moment of such gravity for me, she only
thinks of her being dull by herself,’ thought Levin. And
this lack of candor in a matter of such gravity infuriated
him.
‘It’s out of the question,’ he said sternly.
Agafea Mihalovna, seeing that it was coming to a
quarrel, gently put down her cup and withdrew. Kitty did
not even notice her. The tone in which her husband had
Anna Karenina
1060 of 1759
said the last words wounded her, especially because he
evidently did not believe what she had said.
‘I tell you, that if you go, I shall come with you; I shall
certainly come,’ she said hastily and wrathfully. ‘Why out
of the question? Why do you say it’s out of the question?’
‘Because it’ll be going God knows where, by all sorts of
roads and to all sorts of hotels. You would be a hindrance
to me,’ said Levin, trying to be cool.
‘Not at all. I don’t want anything. Where you can go, I
can...’
‘Well, for one thing then, because this woman’s there
whom you can’t meet.’
‘I don’t know and don’t care to know who’s there and
what. I know that my husband’s brother is dying and my
husband is going to him, and I go with my husband too...’
‘Kitty! Don’t get angry. But just think a little: this is a
matter of such importance that I can’t bear to think that
you should bring in a feeling of weakness, of dislike to
being left alone. Come, you’ll be dull alone, so go and stay
at Moscow a little.’
‘There, you always ascribe base, vile motives to me,’
she said with tears of wounded pride and fury. ‘I didn’t
mean, it wasn’t weakness, it wasn’t...I feel that it’s my duty
to be with my husband when he’s in trouble, but you try
Anna Karenina
1061 of 1759
on purpose to hurt me, you try on purpose not to
understand...’
‘No; this is awful! To be such a slave!’ cried Levin,
getting up, and unable to restrain his anger any longer. But
at the same second he felt that he was beating himself.
‘Then why did you marry? You could have been free.
Why did you, if you regret it?’ she said, getting up and
running away into the drawing room.
When he went to her, she was sobbing.
He began to speak, trying to find words not to dissuade
but simply to soothe her. But she did not heed him, and
would not agree to anything. He bent down to her and
took her hand, which resisted him. He kissed her hand,
kissed her hair, kissed her hand again—still she was silent.
But when he took her face in both his hands and said
‘Kitty!’ she suddenly recovered herself, and began to cry,
and they were reconciled.
It was decided that they should go together the next
day. Levin told his wife that he believed she wanted to go
simply in order to be of use, agreed that Marya
Nikolaevna’s being with his brother did not make her
going improper, but he set off at the bottom of his heart
dissatisfied both with her and with himself. He was
dissatisfied with her for being unable to make up her mind
Anna Karenina
1062 of 1759
to let him go when it was necessary (and how strange it
was for him to think that he, so lately hardly daring to
believe in such happiness as that she could love him—now
was unhappy because she loved him too much!), and he
was dissatisfied with himself for not showing more
strength of will. Even greater was the feeling of
disagreement at the bottom of his heart as to her not
needing to consider the woman who was with his brother,
and he thought with horror of all the contingencies they
might meet with. The mere idea of his wife, his Kitty,
being in the same room with a common wench, set him
shuddering with horror and loathing.
Anna Karenina
1063 of 1759
Chapter 17
The hotel of the provincial town where Nikolay Levin
was lying ill was one of those provincial hotels which are
constructed on the newest model of modern
improvements, with the best intentions of cleanliness,
comfort, and even elegance, but owing to the public that
patronizes them, are with astounding rapidity transformed
into filthy taverns with a pretension of modern
improvement that only makes them worse than the oldfashioned, honestly filthy hotels. This hotel had already
reached that stage, and the soldier in a filthy uniform
smoking in the entry, supposed to stand for a hall-porter,
and the cast-iron, slippery, dark, and disagreeable staircase,
and the free and easy waiter in a filthy frock coat, and the
common dining room with a dusty bouquet of wax
flowers adorning the table, and filth, dust, and disorder
everywhere, and at the same time the sort of modern upto-date self-complacent railway uneasiness of this hotel,
aroused a most painful feeling in Levin after their fresh
young life, especially because the impression of falsity
made by the hotel was so out of keeping with what
awaited them.
Anna Karenina
1064 of 1759
As is invariably the case, after they had been asked at
what price they wanted rooms, it appeared that there was
not one decent room for them; one decent room had been
taken by the inspector of railroads, another by a lawyer
from Moscow, a third by Princess Astafieva from the
country. There remained only one filthy room, next to
which they promised that another should be empty by the
evening. Feeling angry with his wife because what he had
expected had come to pass, which was that at the moment
of arrival, when his heart throbbed with emotion and
anxiety to know how his brother was getting on, he
should have to be seeing after her, instead of rushing
straight to his brother, Levin conducted her to the room
assigned them.
‘Go, do go!’ she said, looking at him with timid and
guilty eyes.
He went out of the door without a word, and at once
stumbled over Marya Nikolaevna, who had heard of his
arrival and had not dared to go in to see him. She was just
the same as when he saw her in Moscow; the same
woolen gown, and bare arms and neck, and the same
good-naturedly stupid, pockmarked face, only a little
plumper.
‘Well, how is he? how is he?’
Anna Karenina
1065 of 1759
‘Very bad. He can’t get up. He has kept expecting you.
He.... Are you...with your wife?’
Levin did not for the first moment understand what it
was confused her, but she immediately enlightened him.
‘I’ll go away. I’ll go down to the kitchen,’ she brought
out. ‘Nikolay Dmitrievitch will be delighted. He heard
about it, and knows your lady, and remembers her
abroad.’
Levin realized that she meant his wife, and did not
know what answer to make.
‘Come along, come along to him!’ he said.
But as soon as he moved, the door of his room opened
and Kitty peeped out. Levin crimsoned both from shame
and anger with his wife, who had put herself and him in
such a difficult position; but Marya Nikolaevna crimsoned
still more. She positively shrank together and flushed to
the point of tears, and clutching the ends of her apron in
both hands, twisted them in her red fingers without
knowing what to say and what to do.
For the first instant Levin saw an expression of eager
curiosity in the eyes with which Kitty looked at this awful
woman, so incomprehensible to her; but it lasted only a
single instant.
Anna Karenina
1066 of 1759
‘Well! how is he?’ she turned to her husband and then
to her.
‘But one can’t go on talking in the passage like this!’
Levin said, looking angrily at a gentleman who walked
jauntily at that instant across the corridor, as though about
his affairs.
‘Well then, come in,’ said Kitty, turning to Marya
Nikolaevna, who had recovered herself, but noticing her
husband’s face of dismay, ‘or go on; go, and then come for
me,’ she said, and went back into the room.
Levin went to his brother’s room. He had not in the
least expected what he saw and felt in his brother’s room.
He had expected to find him in the same state of selfdeception which he had heard was so frequent with the
consumptive, and which had struck him so much during
his brother’s visit in the autumn. He had expected to find
the physical signs of the approach of death more marked—
greater weakness, greater emaciation, but still almost the
same condition of things. He had expected himself to feel
the same distress at the loss of the brother he loved and the
same horror in face of death as he had felt then, only in a
greater degree. And he had prepared himself for this; but
he found something utterly different.
Anna Karenina
1067 of 1759
In a little dirty room with the painted panels of its walls
filthy with spittle, and conversation audible through the
thin partition from the next room, in a stifling atmosphere
saturated with impurities, on a bedstead moved away from
the wall, there lay covered with a quilt, a body. One arm
of this body was above the quilt, and the wrist, huge as a
rake-handle, was attached, inconceivably it seemed, to the
thin, long bone of the arm smooth from the beginning to
the middle. The head lay sideways on the pillow. Levin
could see the scanty locks wet with sweat on the temples
and tense, transparent-looking forehead.
‘It cannot be that that fearful body was my brother
Nikolay?’ thought Levin. But he went closer, saw the face,
and doubt became impossible. In spite of the terrible
change in the face, Levin had only to glance at those eager
eyes raised at his approach, only to catch the faint
movement of the mouth under the sticky mustache, to
realize the terrible truth that this death-like body was his
living brother.
The glittering eyes looked sternly and reproachfully at
his brother as he drew near. And immediately this glance
established a living relationship between living men. Levin
immediately felt the reproach in the eyes fixed on him,
and felt remorse at his own happiness.
Anna Karenina
1068 of 1759
When Konstantin took him by the hand, Nikolay
smiled. The smile was faint, scarcely perceptible, and in
spite of the smile the stern expression of the eyes was
unchanged.
‘You did not expect to find me like this,’ he articulated
with effort.
‘Yes...no,’ said Levin, hesitating over his words. ‘How
was it you didn’t let me know before, that is, at the time
of my wedding? I made inquiries in all directions.’
He had to talk so as not to be silent, and he did not
know what to say, especially as his brother made no reply,
and simply stared without dropping his eyes, and evidently
penetrated to the inner meaning of each word. Levin told
his brother that his wife had come with him. Nikolay
expressed pleasure, but said he was afraid of frightening
her by his condition. A silence followed. Suddenly
Nikolay stirred, and began to say something. Levin
expected something of peculiar gravity and importance
from the expression of his face, but Nikolay began
speaking of his health. He found fault with the doctor,
regretting he had not a celebrated Moscow doctor. Levin
saw that he still hoped.
Anna Karenina
1069 of 1759
Seizing the first moment of silence, Levin got up,
anxious to escape, if only for an instant, from his agonizing
emotion, and said that he would go and fetch his wife.
‘Very well, and I’ll tell her to tidy up here. It’s dirty
and stinking here, I expect. Marya! clear up the room,’ the
sick man said with effort. ‘Oh, and when you’ve cleared
up, go away yourself,’ he added, looking inquiringly at his
brother.
Levin made no answer. Going out into the corridor, he
stopped short. He had said he would fetch his wife, but
now, taking stock of the emotion he was feeling, he
decided that he would try on the contrary to persuade her
not to go in to the sick man. ‘Why should she suffer as I
am suffering?’ he thought.
‘Well, how is he?’ Kitty asked with a frightened face.
‘Oh, it’s awful, it’s awful! What did you come for?’ said
Levin.
Kitty was silent for a few seconds, looking timidly and
ruefully at her husband; then she went up and took him
by the elbow with both hands.
‘Kostya! take me to him; it will be easier for us to bear
it together. You only take me, take me to him, please, and
go away,’ she said. ‘You must understand that for me to
see you, and not to see him, is far more painful. There I
Anna Karenina
1070 of 1759
might be a help to you and to him. Please, let me!’ she
besought her husband, as though the happiness of her life
depended on it.
Levin was obliged to agree, and regaining his
composure, and completely forgetting about Marya
Nikolaevna by now, he went again in to his brother with
Kitty.
Stepping lightly, and continually glancing at her
husband, showing him a valorous and sympathetic face,
Kitty went into the sick-room, and, turning without haste,
noiselessly closed the door. With inaudible steps she went
quickly to the sick man’s bedside, and going up so that he
had not to turn his head, she immediately clasped in her
fresh young hand the skeleton of his huge hand, pressed it,
and began speaking with that soft eagerness, sympathetic
and not jarring, which is peculiar to women.
‘We have met, though we were not acquainted, at
Soden,’ she said. ‘You never thought I was to be your
sister?’
‘You would not have recognized me?’ he said, with a
radiant smile at her entrance.
‘Yes, I should. What a good thing you let us know!
Not a day has passed that Kostya has not mentioned you,
and been anxious.’
Anna Karenina
1071 of 1759
But the sick man’s interest did not last long.
Before she had finished speaking, there had come back
into his face the stern, reproachful expression of the dying
man’s envy of the living.
‘I am afraid you are not quite comfortable here,’ she
said, turning away from his fixed stare, and looking about
the room. ‘We must ask about another room,’ she said to
her husband, ‘so that we might be nearer.’
Anna Karenina
1072 of 1759
Chapter 18
Levin could not look calmly at his brother; he could
not himself be natural and calm in his presence. When he
went in to the sick man, his eyes and his attention were
unconsciously dimmed, and he did not see and did not
distinguish the details of his brother’s position. He smelt
the awful odor, saw the dirt, disorder, and miserable
condition, and heard the groans, and felt that nothing
could be done to help. It never entered his head to analyze
the details of the sick man’s situation, to consider how that
body was lying under the quilt, how those emaciated legs
and thighs and spine were lying huddled up, and whether
they could not be made more comfortable, whether
anything could not be done to make things, if not better,
at least less bad. It made his blood run cold when he began
to think of all these details. He was absolutely convinced
that nothing could be done to prolong his brother’s life or
to relieve his suffering. But a sense of his regarding all aid
as out of the question was felt by the sick man, and
exasperated him. And this made it still more painful for
Levin. To be in the sick-room was agony to him, not to
be there still worse. And he was continually, on various
Anna Karenina
1073 of 1759
pretexts, going out of the room, and coming in again,
because he was unable to remain alone.
But Kitty thought, and felt, and acted quite differently.
On seeing the sick man, she pitied him. And pity in her
womanly heart did not arouse at all that feeling of horror
and loathing that it aroused in her husband, but a desire to
act, to find out all the details of his state, and to remedy
them. And since she had not the slightest doubt that it was
her duty to help him, she had no doubt either that it was
possible, and immediately set to work. The very details,
the mere thought of which reduced her husband to terror,
immediately engaged her attention. She sent for the
doctor, sent to the chemist’s, set the maid who had come
with her and Marya Nikolaevna to sweep and dust and
scrub; she herself washed up something, washed out
something else, laid something under the quilt. Something
was by her directions brought into the sick-room,
something else was carried out. She herself went several
times to her room, regardless of the men she met in the
corridor, got out and brought in sheets, pillow cases,
towels, and shirts.
The waiter who was busy with a party of engineers
dining in the dining hall, came several times with an irate
countenance in answer to her summons, and could not
Anna Karenina
1074 of 1759
avoid carrying out her orders, as she gave them with such
gracious insistence that there was no evading her. Levin
did not approve of all this; he did not believe it would be
of any good to the patient. Above all, he feared the patient
would be angry at it. But the sick man, though he seemed
and was indifferent about it, was not angry, but only
abashed, and on the whole as it were interested in what
she was doing with him. Coming back from the doctor to
whom Kitty had sent him, Levin, on opening the door,
came upon the sick man at the instant when, by Kitty’s
directions, they were changing his linen. The long white
ridge of his spine, with the huge, prominent shoulder
blades and jutting ribs and vertebrae, was bare, and Marya
Nikolaevna and the waiter were struggling with the sleeve
of the night shirt, and could not get the long, limp arm
into it. Kitty, hurriedly closing the door after Levin, was
not looking that way; but the sick man groaned, and she
moved rapidly towards him.
‘Make haste,’ she said.
‘Oh, don’t you come,’ said the sick man angrily. ‘I’ll do
it my myself...’
‘What say?’ queried Marya Nikolaevna. But Kitty heard
and saw he was ashamed and uncomfortable at being
naked before her.
Anna Karenina
1075 of 1759
‘I’m not looking, I’m not looking!’ she said, putting the
arm in. ‘Marya Nikolaevna, you come this side, you do it,’
she added.
‘Please go for me, there’s a little bottle in my small
bag,’ she said, turning to her husband, ‘you know, in the
side pocket; bring it, please, and meanwhile they’ll finish
clearing up here.’
Returning with the bottle, Levin found the sick man
settled comfortably and everything about him completely
changed. The heavy smell was replaced by the smell of
aromatic vinegar, which Kitty with pouting lips and
puffed-out, rosy cheeks was squirting through a little pipe.
There was no dust visible anywhere, a rug was laid by the
bedside. On the table stood medicine bottles and decanters
tidily arranged, and the linen needed was folded up there,
and Kitty’s broderie anglaise. On the other table by the
patient’s bed there were candles and drink and powders.
The sick man himself, washed and combed, lay in clean
sheets on high raised pillows, in a clean night-shirt with a
white collar about his astoundingly thin neck, and with a
new expression of hope looked fixedly at Kitty.
The doctor brought by Levin, and found by him at the
club, was not the one who had been attending Nikolay
Levin, as the patient was dissatisfied with him. The new
Anna Karenina
1076 of 1759
doctor took up a stethoscope and sounded the patient,
shook his head, prescribed medicine, and with extreme
minuteness explained first how to take the medicine and
then what diet was to be kept to. He advised eggs, raw or
hardly cooked, and seltzer water, with warm milk at a
certain temperature. When the doctor had gone away the
sick man said something to his brother, of which Levin
could distinguish only the last words: ‘Your Katya.’ By the
expression with which he gazed at her, Levin saw that he
was praising her. He called indeed to Katya, as he called
her.
‘I’m much better already,’ he said. ‘Why, with you I
should have got well long ago. How nice it is!’ he took
her hand and drew it towards his lips, but as though afraid
she would dislike it he changed his mind, let it go, and
only stroked it. Kitty took his hand in both hers and
pressed it.
‘Now turn me over on the left side and go to bed,’ he
said.
No one could make out what he said but Kitty; she
alone understood. She understood because she was all the
while mentally keeping watch on what he needed.
‘On the other side,’ she said to her husband, ‘he always
sleeps on that side. Turn him over, it’s so disagreeable
Anna Karenina
1077 of 1759
calling the servants. I’m not strong enough. Can you?’ she
said to Marya Nikolaevna.
‘I’m afraid not,’ answered Marya Nikolaevna.
Terrible as it was to Levin to put his arms round that
terrible body, to take hold of that under the quilt, of
which he preferred to know nothing, under his wife’s
influence he made his resolute face that she knew so well,
and putting his arms into the bed took hold of the body,
but in spite of his own strength he was struck by the
strange heaviness of those powerless limbs. While he was
turning him over, conscious of the huge emaciated arm
about his neck, Kitty swiftly and noiselessly turned the
pillow, beat it up and settled in it the sick man’s head,
smoothing back his hair, which was sticking again to his
moist brow.
The sick man kept his brother’s hand in his own. Levin
felt that he meant to do something with his hand and was
pulling it somewhere. Levin yielded with a sinking heart:
yes, he drew it to his mouth and kissed it. Levin, shaking
with sobs and unable to articulate a word, went out of the
room.
Anna Karenina
1078 of 1759
Chapter 19
‘Thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent,
and hast revealed them unto babes.’ So Levin thought
about his wife as he talked to her that evening.
Levin thought of the text, not because he considered
himself ‘wise and prudent.’ He did not so consider
himself, but he could not help knowing that he had more
intellect than his wife and Agafea Mihalovna, and he could
not help knowing that when he thought of death, he
thought with all the force of his intellect. He knew too
that the brains of many great men, whose thoughts he had
read, had brooded over death and yet knew not a
hundredth part of what his wife and Agafea Mihalovna
knew about it. Different as those two women were,
Agafea Mihalovna and Katya, as his brother Nikolay had
called her, and as Levin particularly liked to call her now,
they were quite alike in this. Both knew, without a shade
of doubt, what sort of thing life was and what was death,
and though neither of them could have answered, and
would even not have understood the questions that
presented themselves to Levin, both had no doubt of the
significance of this event, and were precisely alike in their
Anna Karenina
1079 of 1759
way of looking at it, which they shared with millions of
people. The proof that they knew for a certainty the
nature of death lay in the fact that they knew without a
second of hesitation how to deal with the dying, and were
not frightened of them. Levin and other men like him,
though they could have said a great deal about death,
obviously did not know this since they were afraid of
death, and were absolutely at a loss what to do when
people were dying. If Levin had been alone now with his
brother Nikolay, he would have looked at him with
terror, and with still greater terror waited, and would not
have known what else to do.
More than that, he did not know what to say, how to
look, how to move. To talk of outside things seemed to
him shocking, impossible, to talk of death and depressing
subjects—also impossible. To be silent, also impossible. ‘If
I look at him he will think I am studying him, I am afraid;
if I don’t look at him, he’ll think I’m thinking of other
things. If I walk on tiptoe, he will be vexed; to tread
firmly, I’m ashamed.’ Kitty evidently did not think of
herself, and had no time to think about herself: she was
thinking about him because she knew something, and all
went well. She told him about herself even and about her
wedding, and smiled and sympathized with him and
Anna Karenina
1080 of 1759
petted him, and talked of cases of recovery and all went
well; so then she must know. The proof that her behavior
and Agafea Mihalovna’s was not instinctive, animal,
irrational, was that apart from the physical treatment, the
relief of suffering, both Agafea Mihalovna and Kitty
required for the dying man something else more important
than the physical treatment, and something which had
nothing in common with physical conditions. Agafea
Mihalovna, speaking of the man just dead, had said: ‘Well,
thank God, he took the sacrament and received
absolution; God grant each one of us such a death.’ Katya
in just the same way, besides all her care about linen,
bedsores, drink, found time the very first day to persuade
the sick man of the necessity of taking the sacrament and
receiving absolution.
On getting back from the sick-room to their own two
rooms for the night, Levin sat with hanging head not
knowing what to do. Not to speak of supper, of preparing
for bed, of considering what they were going to do, he
could not even talk to his wife; he was ashamed to. Kitty,
on the contrary, was more active than usual. She was even
livelier than usual. She ordered supper to be brought,
herself unpacked their things, and herself helped to make
the beds, and did not even forget to sprinkle them with
Anna Karenina
1081 of 1759
Persian powder. She showed that alertness, that swiftness
of reflection comes out in men before a battle, in conflict,
in the dangerous and decisive moments of life—those
moments when a man shows once and for all his value,
and that all his past has not been wasted but has been a
preparation for these moments.
Everything went rapidly in her hands, and before it was
twelve o’clock all their things were arranged cleanly and
tidily in her rooms, in such a way that the hotel rooms
seemed like home: the beds were made, brushes, combs,
looking-glasses were put out, table napkins were spread.
Levin felt that it was unpardonable to eat, to sleep, to
talk even now, and it seemed to him that every movement
he made was unseemly. She arranged the brushes, but she
did it all so that there was nothing shocking in it.
They could neither of them eat, however, and for a
long while they could not sleep, and did not even go to
bed.
‘I am very glad I persuaded him to receive extreme
unction tomorrow,’ she said, sitting in her dressing jacket
before her folding looking glass, combing her soft, fragrant
hair with a fine comb. ‘I have never seen it, but I know,
mamma has told me, there are prayers said for recovery.’
Anna Karenina
1082 of 1759
‘Do you suppose he can possibly recover?’ said Levin,
watching a slender tress at the back of her round little head
that was continually hidden when she passed the comb
through the front.
‘I asked the doctor; he said he couldn’t live more than
three days. But can they be sure? I’m very glad, anyway,
that I persuaded him,’ she said, looking askance at her
husband through her hair. ‘Anything is possible,’ she
added with that peculiar, rather sly expression that was
always in her face when she spoke of religion.
Since their conversation about religion when they were
engaged neither of them had ever started a discussion of
the subject, but she performed all the ceremonies of going
to church, saying her prayers, and so on, always with the
unvarying conviction that this ought to be so. In spite of
his assertion to the contrary, she was firmly persuaded that
he was as much a Christian as she, and indeed a far better
one; and all that he said about it was simply one of his
absurd masculine freaks, just as he would say about her
broderie anglaise that good people patch holes, but that
she cut them on purpose, and so on.
‘Yes, you see this woman, Marya Nikolaevna, did not
know how to manage all this,’ said Levin. ‘And...I must
own I’m very, very glad you came. You are such purity
Anna Karenina
1083 of 1759
that....’ He took her hand and did not kiss it (to kiss her
hand in such closeness to death seemed to him improper);
he merely squeezed it with a penitent air, looking at her
brightening eyes.
‘It would have been miserable for you to be alone,’ she
said, and lifting her hands which hid her cheeks flushing
with pleasure, twisted her coil of hair on the nape of her
neck and pinned it there. ‘No,’ she went on, ‘she did not
know how.... Luckily, I learned a lot at Soden.’
‘Surely there are not people there so ill?’
‘Worse.’
‘What’s so awful to me is that I can’t see him as he was
when he was young. You would not believe how
charming he was as a youth, but I did not understand him
then.’
‘I can quite, quite believe it. How I feel that we might
have been friends!’ she said; and, distressed at what she had
said, she looked round at her husband, and tears came into
her eyes.
‘Yes, MIGHT HAVE BEEN,’ he said mournfully.
‘He’s just one of those people of whom they say they’re
not for this world.’
‘But we have many days before us; we must go to bed,’
said Kitty, glancing at her tiny watch.
Anna Karenina
1084 of 1759
Chapter 20
The next day the sick man received the sacrament and
extreme unction. During the ceremony Nikolay Levin
prayed fervently. His great eyes, fastened on the holy
image that was set out on a card table covered with a
colored napkin, expressed such passionate prayer and hope
that it was awful to Levin to see it. Levin knew that this
passionate prayer and hope would only make him feel
more bitterly parting from the life he so loved. Levin
knew his brother and the workings of his intellect: he
knew that his unbelief came not from life being easier for
him without faith, but had grown up because step by step
the contemporary scientific interpretation of natural
phenomena crushed out the possibility of faith; and so he
knew that his present return was not a legitimate one,
brought about by way of the same working of his intellect,
but simply a temporary, interested return to faith in a
desperate hope of recovery. Levin knew too that Kitty had
strengthened his hope by accounts of the marvelous
recoveries she had heard of. Levin knew all this; and it was
agonizingly painful to him to behold the supplicating,
hopeful eyes and the emaciated wrist, lifted with difficulty,
Anna Karenina
1085 of 1759
making the sign of the cross on the tense brow, and the
prominent shoulders and hollow, gasping chest, which one
could not feel consistent with the life the sick man was
praying for. During the sacrament Levin did what he, an
unbeliever, had done a thousand times. He said, addressing
God, ‘If Thou dost exist, make this man to recover’ (of
course this same thing has been repeated many times), ‘and
Thou wilt save him and me.’
After extreme unction the sick man became suddenly
much better. He did not cough once in the course of an
hour, smiled, kissed Kitty’s hand, thanking her with tears,
and said he was comfortable, free from pain, and that he
felt strong and had an appetite. He even raised himself
when his soup was brought, and asked for a cutlet as well.
Hopelessly ill as he was, obvious as it was at the first glance
that he could not recover, Levin and Kitty were for that
hour both in the same state of excitement, happy, though
fearful of being mistaken.
‘Is he better?’
‘Yes, much.’
‘It’s wonderful.’
‘There’s nothing wonderful in it.’
‘Anyway, he’s better,’ they said in a whisper, smiling to
one another.
Anna Karenina
1086 of 1759
This self-deception was not of long duration. The sick
man fell into a quiet sleep, but he was waked up half an
hour later by his cough. And all at once every hope
vanished in those about him and in himself. The reality of
his suffering crushed all hopes in Levin and Kitty and in
the sick man himself, leaving no doubt, no memory even
of past hopes.
Without referring to what he had believed in half an
hour before, as though ashamed even to recall it, he asked
for iodine to inhale in a bottle covered with perforated
paper. Levin gave him the bottle, and the same look of
passionate hope with which he had taken the sacrament
was now fastened on his brother, demanding from him the
confirmation of the doctor’s words that inhaling iodine
worked wonders.
‘Is Katya not here?’ he gasped, looking round while
Levin reluctantly assented to the doctor’s words. ‘No; so I
can say it.... It was for her sake I went through that farce.
She’s so sweet; but you and I can’t deceive ourselves. This
is what I believe in,’ he said, and, squeezing the bottle in
his bony hand, he began breathing over it.
At eight o’clock in the evening Levin and his wife were
drinking tea in their room when Marya Nikolaevna ran in
to them breathlessly. She was pale, and her lips were
Anna Karenina
1087 of 1759
quivering. ‘He is dying!’ she whispered. ‘I’m afraid will die
this minute.’
Both of them ran to him. He was sitting raised up with
one elbow on the bed, his long back bent, and his head
hanging low.
‘How do you feel?’ Levin asked in a whisper, after a
silence.
‘I feel I’m setting off,’ Nikolay said with difficulty, but
with extreme distinctness, screwing the words out of
himself. He did not raise his head, but simply turned his
eyes upwards, without their reaching his brother’s face.
‘Katya, go away!’ he added.
Levin jumped up, and with a peremptory whisper
made her go out.
‘I’m setting off,’ he said again.
‘Why do you think so?’ said Levin, so as to say
something.
‘Because I’m setting off,’ he repeated, as though he had
a liking for the phrase. ‘It’s the end.’
Marya Nikolaevna went up to him.
‘You had better lie down; you’d be easier,’ she said.
‘I shall lie down soon enough,’ he pronounced slowly,
‘when I’m dead,’ he said sarcastically, wrathfully. ‘Well,
you can lay me down if you like.’
Anna Karenina
1088 of 1759
Levin laid his brother on his back, sat down beside him,
and gazed at his face, holding his breath. The dying man
lay with closed eyes, but the muscles twitched from time
to time on his forehead, as with one thinking deeply and
intensely. Levin involuntarily thought with him of what it
was that was happening to him now, but in spite of all his
mental efforts to go along with him he saw by the
expression of that calm, stern face that for the dying man
all was growing clearer and clearer that was still as dark as
ever for Levin.
‘Yes, yes, so,’ the dying man articulated slowly at
intervals. ‘Wait a little.’ He was silent. ‘Right!’ he
pronounced all at once reassuringly, as though all were
solved for him. ‘O Lord!’ he murmured, and sighed
deeply.
Marya Nikolaevna felt his feet. ‘They’re getting cold,’
she whispered.
For a long while, a very long while it seemed to Levin,
the sick man lay motionless. But he was still alive, and
from time to time he sighed. Levin by now was exhausted
from mental strain. He felt that, with no mental effort,
could he understand what it was that was right. He could
not even think of the problem of death itself, but with no
will of his own thoughts kept coming to him of what he
Anna Karenina
1089 of 1759
had to do next; closing the dead man’s eyes, dressing him,
ordering the coffin. And, strange to say, he felt utterly
cold, and was not conscious of sorrow nor of loss, less still
of pity for his brother. If he had any feeling for his brother
at that moment, it was envy for the knowledge the dying
man had now that he could not have.
A long time more he sat over him so, continually
expecting the end. But the end did not come. The door
opened and Kitty appeared. Levin got up to stop her. But
at the moment he was getting up, he caught the sound of
the dying man stirring.
‘Don’t go away,’ said Nikolay and held out his hand.
Levin gave him his, and angrily waved to his wife to go
away.
With the dying man’s hand in his hand, he sat for half
an hour, an hour, another hour. He did not think of death
at all now. He wondered what Kitty was doing; who lived
in the next room; whether the doctor lived in a house of
his own. He longed for food and for sleep. He cautiously
drew away his hand and felt the feet. The feet were cold,
but the sick man was still breathing. Levin tried again to
move away on tiptoe, but the sick man stirred again and
said: ‘Don’t go.’
Anna Karenina
1090 of 1759
* * * * * * * *
The dawn came; the sick man’s condition was
unchanged. Levin stealthily withdrew his hand, and
without looking at the dying man, went off to his own
room and went to sleep. When he woke up, instead of
news of his brother’s death which he expected, he learned
that the sick man had returned to his earlier condition. He
had begun sitting up again, coughing, had begun eating
again, talking again, and again had ceased to talk of death,
again had begun to express hope of his recovery, and had
become more irritable and more gloomy than ever. No
one, neither his brother nor Kitty, could soothe him. He
was angry with everyone, and said nasty things to
everyone, reproached everyone for his sufferings, and
insisted that they should get him a celebrated doctor from
Moscow. To all inquiries made him as to how he felt, he
made the same answer with an expression of vindictive
reproachfulness, ‘I’m suffering horribly, intolerably!’
The sick man was suffering more and more, especially
from bedsores, which it was impossible now to remedy,
and grew more and more angry with everyone about him,
blaming them for everything, and especially for not having
brought him a doctor from Moscow. Kitty tried in every
Anna Karenina
1091 of 1759
possible way to relieve him, to soothe him; but it was all
in vain, and Levin saw that she herself was exhausted both
physically and morally, though she would not admit it.
The sense of death, which had been evoked in all by his
taking leave of life on the night when he had sent for his
brother, was broken up. Everyone knew that he must
inevitably die soon, that he was half dead already.
Everyone wished for nothing but that he should die as
soon as possible, and everyone, concealing this, gave him
medicines, tried to find remedies and doctors, and
deceived him and themselves and each other. All this was
falsehood, disgusting, irreverent deceit. And owing to the
bent of his character, and because he loved the dying man
more than anyone else did, Levin was most painfully
conscious of this deceit.
Levin, who had long been possessed by the idea of
reconciling his brothers, at least in face of death, had
written to his brother, Sergey Ivanovitch, and having
received an answer from him, he read this letter to the sick
man. Sergey Ivanovitch wrote that he could not come
himself, and in touching terms he begged his brother’s
forgiveness.
The sick man said nothing.
Anna Karenina
1092 of 1759
‘What am I to write to him?’ said Levin. ‘I hope you
are not angry with him?’
‘No, not the least!’ Nikolay answered, vexed at the
question. ‘Tell him to send me a doctor.’
Three more days of agony followed; the sick man was
still in the same condition. The sense of longing for his
death was felt by everyone now at the mere sight of him,
by the waiters and the hotel-keeper and all the people
staying in the hotel, and the doctor and Marya Nikolaevna
and Levin and Kitty. The sick man alone did not express
this feeling, but on the contrary was furious at their not
getting him doctors, and went on taking medicine and
talking of life. Only at rare moments, when the opium
gave him an instant’s relief from the never-ceasing pain, he
would sometimes, half asleep, utter what was ever more
intense in his heart than in all the others: ‘Oh, if it were
only the end!’ or: ‘When will it be over?’
His sufferings, steadily growing more intense, did their
work and prepared him for death. There was no position
in which he was not in pain, there was not a minute in
which he was unconscious of it, not a limb, not a part of
his body that did not ache and cause him agony. Even the
memories, the impressions, the thoughts of this body
awakened in him now the same aversion as the body itself.
Anna Karenina
1093 of 1759
The sight of other people, their remarks, his own
reminiscences, everything was for him a source of agony.
Those about him felt this, and instinctively did not allow
themselves to move freely, to talk, to express their wishes
before him. All his life was merged in the one feeling of
suffering and desire to be rid of it.
There was evidently coming over him that revulsion
that would make him look upon death as the goal of his
desires, as happiness. Hitherto each individual desire,
aroused by suffering or privation, such as hunger, fatigue,
thirst, had been satisfied by some bodily function giving
pleasure. But now no physical craving or suffering
received relief, and the effort to relieve them only caused
fresh suffering. And so all desires were merged in one—
the desire to be rid of all his sufferings and their source,
the body. But he had no words to express this desire of
deliverance, and so he did not speak of it, and from habit
asked for the satisfaction of desires which could not now
be satisfied. ‘Turn me over on the other side,’ he would
say, and immediately after he would ask to be turned back
again as before. ‘Give me some broth. Take away the
broth. Talk of something: why are you silent?’ And
directly they began to talk ho would close his eyes, and
would show weariness, indifference, and loathing.
Anna Karenina
1094 of 1759
On the tenth day from their arrival at the town, Kitty
was unwell. She suffered from headache and sickness, and
she could not get up all the morning.
The doctor opined that the indisposition arose from
fatigue and excitement, and prescribed rest.
After dinner, however, Kitty got up and went as usual
with her work to the sick man. He looked at her sternly
when she came in, and smiled contemptuously when she
said she had been unwell. That day he was continually
blowing his nose, and groaning piteously.
‘How do you feel?’ she asked him.
‘Worse,’ he articulated with difficulty. ‘In pain!’
‘In pain, where?’
‘Everywhere.’
‘It will be over today, you will see,’ said Marya
Nikolaevna. Though it was said in a whisper, the sick
man, whose hearing Levin had noticed was very keen,
must have heard. Levin said hush to her, and looked
round at the sick man. Nikolay had heard; but these words
produced no effect on him. His eyes had still the same
intense, reproachful look.
‘Why do you think so?’ Levin asked her, when she had
followed him into the corridor.
Anna Karenina
1095 of 1759
‘He has begun picking at himself,’ said Marya
Nikolaevna.
‘How do you mean?’
‘Like this,’ she said, tugging at the folds of her woolen
skirt. Levin noticed, indeed, that all that day the patient
pulled at himself, as it were, trying to snatch something
away.
Marya Nikolaevna’s prediction came true. Towards
night the sick man was not able to lift his hands, and could
only gaze before him with the same intensely concentrated
expression in his eyes. Even when his brother or Kitty
bent over him, so that he could see them, he looked just
the same. Kitty sent for the priest to read the prayer for
the dying.
While the priest was reading it, the dying man did not
show any sign of life; his eyes were closed. Levin, Kitty,
and Marya Nikolaevna stood at the bedside. The priest
had not quite finished reading the prayer when the dying
man stretched, sighed, and opened his eyes. The priest, on
finishing the prayer, put the cross to the cold forehead,
then slowly returned it to the stand, and after standing for
two minutes more in silence, he touched the huge,
bloodless hand that was turning cold.
Anna Karenina
1096 of 1759
‘He is gone,’ said the priest, and would have moved
away; but suddenly there was a faint stir in the mustaches
of the dead man that seemed glued together, and quite
distinctly in the hush they heard from the bottom of the
chest the sharply defined sounds:
‘Not quite...soon.’
And a minute later the face brightened, a smile came
out under the mustaches, and the women who had
gathered round began carefully laying out the corpse.
The sight of his brother, and the nearness of death,
revived in Levin that sense of horror in face of the
insoluble enigma, together with the nearness and
inevitability of death, that had come upon him that
autumn evening when his brother had come to him. This
feeling was now even stronger than before; even less than
before did he feel capable of apprehending the meaning of
death, and its inevitability rose up before him more
terrible than ever. But now, thanks to his wife’s presence,
that feeling did not reduce him to despair. In spite of
death, he felt the need of life and love. He felt that love
saved him from despair, and that this love, under the
menace of despair, had become still stronger and purer.
The one mystery of death, still unsolved, had scarcely
Anna Karenina
1097 of 1759
passed before his eyes, when another mystery had arisen, as
insoluble, urging him to love and to life.
The doctor confirmed his suppositions in regard to
Kitty. Her indisposition was a symptom that she was with
child.
Anna Karenina
1098 of 1759
Chapter 21
From the moment when Alexey Alexandrovitch
understood from his interviews with Betsy and with
Stepan Arkadyevitch that all that was expected of him was
to leave his wife in peace, without burdening her with his
presence, and that his wife herself desired this, he felt so
distraught that he could come to no decision of himself;
he did not know himself what he wanted now, and
putting himself in the hands of those who were so pleased
to interest themselves in his affairs, he met everything with
unqualified assent. It was only when Anna had left his
house, and the English governess sent to ask him whether
she should dine with him or separately, that for the first
time he clearly comprehended his position, and was
appalled by it. Most difficult of all in this position was the
fact that he could not in any way connect and reconcile
his past with what was now. It was not the past when he
had lived happily with his wife that troubled him. The
transition from that past to a knowledge of his wife’s
unfaithfulness he had lived through miserably already; that
state was painful, but he could understand it. If his wife
had then, on declaring to him her unfaithfulness, left him,
Anna Karenina
1099 of 1759
he would have been wounded, unhappy, but he would
not have been in the hopeless position—incomprehensible
to himself—in which he felt himself now. He could not
now reconcile his immediate past, his tenderness, his love
for his sick wife, and for the other man’s child with what
was now the case, that is with the fact that, as it were, in
return for all this he now found himself alone, put to
shame, a laughing-stock, needed by no one, and despised
by everyone.
For the first two days after his wife’s departure Alexey
Alexandrovitch received applicants for assistance and his
chief secretary, drove to the committee, and went down
to dinner in the dining room as usual. Without giving
himself a reason for what he was doing, he strained every
nerve of his being for those two days, simply to preserve
an appearance of composure, and even of indifference.
Answering inquiries about the disposition of Anna
Arkadyevna’s rooms and belongings, he had exercised
immense self-control to appear like a man in whose eyes
what had occurred was not unforeseen nor out of the
ordinary course of events, and he attained his aim: no one
could have detected in him signs of despair. But on the
second day after her departure, when Korney gave him a
bill from a fashionable draper’s shop, which Anna had
Anna Karenina
1100 of 1759
forgotten to pay, and announced that the clerk from the
shop was waiting, Alexey Alexandrovitch told him to
show the clerk up.
‘Excuse me, your excellency, for venturing to trouble
you. But if you direct us to apply to her excellency, would
you graciously oblige us with her address?’
Alexey Alexandrovitch pondered, as it seemed to the
clerk, and all at once, turning round, he sat down at the
table. Letting his head sink into his hands, he sat for a long
while in that position, several times attempted to speak
and stopped short. Korney, perceiving his master’s
emotion, asked the clerk to call another time. Left alone,
Alexey Alexandrovitch recognized that he had not the
strength to keep up the line of firmness and composure
any longer. He gave orders for the carriage that was
awaiting him to be taken back, and for no one to be
admitted, and he did not go down to dinner.
He felt that he could not endure the weight of
universal contempt and exasperation, which he had
distinctly seen in the face of the clerk and of Korney, and
of everyone, without exception, whom he had met during
those two days. He felt that he could not turn aside from
himself the hatred of men, because that hatred did not
come from his being bad (in that case he could have tried
Anna Karenina
1101 of 1759
to be better), but from his being shamefully and
repulsively unhappy. He knew that for this, for the very
fact that his heart was torn with grief, they would be
merciless to him. He felt that men would crush him as
dogs strangle a torn dog yelping with pain. He knew that
his sole means of security against people was to hide his
wounds from them, and instinctively he tried to do this for
two days, but now he felt incapable of keeping up the
unequal struggle.
His despair was even intensified by the consciousness
that he was utterly alone in his sorrow. In all Petersburg
there was not a human being to whom he could express
what he was feeling, who would feel for him, not as a
high official, not as a member of society, but simply as a
suffering man; indeed he had not such a one in the whole
world.
Alexey Alexandrovitch grew up an orphan. There were
two brothers. They did not remember their father, and
their mother died when Alexey Alexandrovitch was ten
years old. The property was a small one. Their uncle,
Karenin, a government official of high standing, at one
time a favorite of the late Tsar, had brought them up.
On completing his high school and university courses
with medals, Alexey Alexandrovitch had, with his uncle’s
Anna Karenina
1102 of 1759
aid, immediately started in a prominent position in the
service, and from that time forward he had devoted
himself exclusively to political ambition. In the high
school and the university, and afterwards in the service,
Alexey Alexandrovitch had never formed a close
friendship with anyone. His brother had been the person
nearest to his heart, but he had a post in the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs, and was always abroad, where he had died
shortly after Alexey Alexandrovitch’s marriage.
While he was governor of a province, Anna’s aunt, a
wealthy provincial lady, had thrown him—middle-aged as
he was, though young for a governor—with her niece,
and had succeeded in putting him in such a position that
he had either to declare himself or to leave the town.
Alexey Alexandrovitch was not long in hesitation. There
were at the time as many reasons for the step as against it,
and there was no overbalancing consideration to outweigh
his invariable rule of abstaining when in doubt. But Anna’s
aunt had through a common acquaintance insinuated that
he had already compromised the girl, and that he was in
honor bound to make her an offer. He made the offer, and
concentrated on his betrothed and his wife all the feeling
of which he was capable.
Anna Karenina
1103 of 1759
The attachment he felt to Anna precluded in his heart
every need of intimate relations with others. And now
among all his acquaintances he had not one friend. He had
plenty of so-called connections, but no friendships. Alexey
Alexandrovitch had plenty of people whom he could
invite to dinner, to whose sympathy he could appeal in
any public affair he was concerned about, whose interest
he could reckon upon for anyone he wished to help, with
whom he could candidly discuss other people’s business
and affairs of state. But his relations with these people
were confined to one clearly defined channel, and had a
certain routine from which it was impossible to depart.
There was one man, a comrade of his at the university,
with whom he had made friends later, and with whom he
could have spoken of a personal sorrow; but this friend
had a post in the Department of Education in a remote
part of Russia. Of the people in Petersburg the most
intimate and most possible were his chief secretary and his
doctor.
Mihail Vassilievitch Sludin, the chief secretary, was a
straightforward, intelligent, good-hearted, and
conscientious man, and Alexey Alexandrovitch was aware
of his personal goodwill. But their five years of official
Anna Karenina
1104 of 1759
work together seemed to have put a barrier between them
that cut off warmer relations.
After signing the papers brought him, Alexey
Alexandrovitch had sat for a long while in silence,
glancing at Mihail Vassilievitch, and several times he
attempted to speak, but could not. He had already
prepared the phrase: ‘You have heard of my trouble?’ But
he ended by saying, as usual: ‘So you’ll get this ready for
me?’ and with that dismissed him.
The other person was the doctor, who had also a
kindly feeling for him; but there had long existed a
taciturn understanding between them that both were
weighed down by work, and always in a hurry.
Of his women friends, foremost amongst them
Countess Lidia Ivanovna, Alexey Alexandrovitch never
thought. All women, simply as women, were terrible and
distasteful to him.
Anna Karenina
1105 of 1759
Chapter 22
Alexey Alexandrovitch had forgotten the Countess
Lidia Ivanovna, but she had not forgotten him. At the
bitterest moment of his lonely despair she came to him,
and without waiting to be announced, walked straight into
his study. She found him as he was sitting with his head in
both hands.
‘J’ai force la consigne,’ she said, walking in with rapid
steps and breathing hard with excitement and rapid
exercise. ‘I have heard all! Alexey Alexandrovitch! Dear
friend!’ she went on, warmly squeezing his hand in both
of hers and gazing with her fine pensive eyes into his.
Alexey Alexandrovitch, frowning, got up, and
disengaging his hand, moved her a chair.
‘Won’t you sit down, countess? I’m seeing no one
because I’m unwell, countess,’ he said, and his lips
twitched.
‘Dear friend!’ repeated Countess Lidia Ivanovna, never
taking her eyes off his, and suddenly her eyebrows rose at
the inner corners, describing a triangle on her forehead,
her ugly yellow face became still uglier, but Alexey
Alexandrovitch felt that she was sorry for him and was
Anna Karenina
1106 of 1759
preparing to cry. And he too was softened; he snatched
her plump hand and proceeded to kiss it.
‘Dear friend!’ she said in a voice breaking with
emotion. ‘You ought not to give way to grief. Your
sorrow is a great one, but you ought to find consolation.’
‘I am crushed, I am annihilated, I am no longer a man!’
said Alexey Alexandrovitch, letting go her hand, but still
gazing into her brimming eyes. ‘My position is so awful
because I can find nowhere, I cannot find within me
strength to support me.’
‘You will find support; seek it—not in me, though I
beseech you to believe in my friendship,’ she said, with a
sigh. ‘Our support is love, that love that He has
vouchsafed us. His burden is light,’ she said, with the look
of ecstasy Alexey Alexandrovitch knew so well. ‘He will
be your support and your succor.’
Although there was in these words a flavor of that
sentimental emotion at her own lofty feelings, and that
new mystical fervor which had lately gained ground in
Petersburg, and which seemed to Alexey Alexandrovitch
disproportionate, still it was pleasant to him to hear this
now.
‘I am weak. I am crushed. I foresaw nothing, and now
I understand nothing.’
Anna Karenina
1107 of 1759
‘Dear friend,’ repeated Lidia Ivanovna.
‘It’s not the loss of what I have not now, it’s not that!’
pursued Alexey Alexandrovitch. ‘I do not grieve for that.
But I cannot help feeling humiliated before other people
for the position I am placed in. It is wrong, but I can’t
help it, I can’t help it.’
‘Not you it was performed that noble act of
forgiveness, at which I was moved to ecstasy, and
everyone else too, but He, working within your heart,’
said Countess Lidia Ivanovna, raising her eyes rapturously,
‘and so you cannot be ashamed of your act.’
Alexey Alexandrovitch knitted his brows, and crooking
his hands, he cracked his fingers.
‘One must know all the facts,’ he said in his thin voice.
‘A man’s strength has its limits, countess, and I have
reached my limits. The whole day I have had to be
making arrangements, arrangements about household
matters arising’ (he emphasized the word arising) ‘from my
new, solitary position. The servants, the governess, the
accounts.... These pinpricks have stabbed me to the heart,
and I have not the strength to bear it. At dinner...
yesterday, I was almost getting up from the dinner table. I
could not bear the way my son looked at me. He did not
ask me the meaning of it all, but he wanted to ask, and I
Anna Karenina
1108 of 1759
could not bear the look in his eyes. He was afraid to look
at me, but that is not all....’ Alexey Alexandrovitch would
have referred to the bill that had been brought him, but
his voice shook, and he stopped. That bill on blue paper,
for a hat and ribbons, he could not recall without a rush of
self-pity.
‘I understand, dear friend,’ said Lidia Ivanovna. ‘I
understand it all. Succor and comfort you will find not in
me, though I have come only to aid you if I can. If I
could take from off you all these petty, humiliating
cares...I understand that a woman’s word, a woman’s
superintendence is needed. You will intrust it to me?’
Silently and gratefully Alexey Alexandrovitch pressed
her hand.
‘Together we will take care of Seryozha. Practical
affairs are not my strong point. But I will set to work. I
will be your housekeeper. Don’t thank me. I do it not
from myself..’
‘I cannot help thanking you.’
‘But, dear friend, do not give way to the feeling of
which you spoke—being ashamed of what is the
Christian’s highest glory: *he who humbles himself shall
be exalted*. And you cannot thank me. You must thank
Him, and pray to Him for succor. In Him alone we find
Anna Karenina
1109 of 1759
peace, consolation, salvation, and love,’ she said, and
turning her eyes heavenwards, she began praying, as
Alexey Alexandrovitch gathered from her silence.
Alexey Alexandrovitch listened to her now, and those
expressions which had seemed to him, if not distasteful, at
least exaggerated, now seemed to him natural and
consolatory. Alexey Alexandrovitch had disliked this new
enthusiastic fervor. He was a believer, who was interested
in religion primarily in its political aspect, and the new
doctrine which ventured upon several new interpretations,
just because it paved the way to discussion and analysis,
was in principle disagreeable to him. He had hitherto
taken up a cold and even antagonistic attitude to this new
doctrine, and with Countess Lidia Ivanovna, who had
been carried away by it, he had never argued, but by
silence had assiduously parried her attempts to provoke
him into argument. Now for the first time he heard her
words with pleasure, and did not inwardly oppose them.
‘I am very, very grateful to you, both for your deeds
and for your words,’ he said, when she had finished
praying.
Countess Lidia Ivanovna once more pressed both her
friend’s hands.
Anna Karenina
1110 of 1759
‘Now I will enter upon my duties,’ she said with a
smile after a pause, as she wiped away the traces of tears. ‘I
am going to Seryozha. Only in the last extremity shall I
apply to you.’ And she got up and went out.
Countess Lidia Ivanovna went into Seryozha’s part of
the house, and dropping tears on the scared child’s cheeks,
she told him that his father was a saint and his mother was
dead.
Countess Lidia Ivanovna kept her promise. She did
actually take upon herself the care of the organization and
management of Alexey Alexandrovitch’s household. But
she had not overstated the case when saying that practical
affairs were not her strong point. All her arrangements had
to be modified because they could not be carried out, and
they were modified by Korney, Alexey Alexandrovitch’s
valet, who, though no one was aware of the fact, now
managed Karenin’s household, and quietly and discreetly
reported to his master while he was dressing all it was
necessary for him to know. But Lidia Ivanovna’s help was
none the less real; she gave Alexey Alexandrovitch moral
support in the consciousness of her love and respect for
him, and still more, as it was soothing to her to believe, in
that she almost turned him to Christianity—that is, from
an indifferent and apathetic believer she turned him into
Anna Karenina
1111 of 1759
an ardent and steadfast adherent of the new interpretation
of Christian doctrine, which had been gaining ground of
late in Petersburg. It was easy for Alexey Alexandrovitch
to believe in this teaching. Alexey Alexandrovitch, like
Lidia Ivanovna indeed, and others who shared their views,
was completely devoid of vividness of imagination, that
spiritual faculty in virtue of which the conceptions evoked
by the imagination become so vivid that they must needs
be in harmony with other conceptions, and with actual
fact. He saw nothing impossible and inconceivable in the
idea that death, though existing for unbelievers, did not
exist for him, and that, as he was possessed of the most
perfect faith, of the measure of which he was himself the
judge, therefore there was no sin in his soul, and he was
experiencing complete salvation here on earth.
It is true that the erroneousness and shallowness of this
conception of his faith was dimly perceptible to Alexey
Alexandrovitch, and he knew that when, without the
slightest idea that his forgiveness was the action of a higher
power, he had surrendered directly to the feeling of
forgiveness, he had felt more happiness than now when he
was thinking every instant that Christ was in his heart, and
that in signing official papers he was doing His will. But
for Alexey Alexandrovitch it was a necessity to think in
Anna Karenina
1112 of 1759
that way; it was such a necessity for him in his humiliation
to have some elevated standpoint, however imaginary,
from which, looked down upon by all, he could look
down on others, that he clung, as to his one salvation, to
his delusion of salvation.
Anna Karenina
1113 of 1759
Chapter 23
The Countess Lidia Ivanovna had, as a very young and
sentimental girl, been married to a wealthy man of high
rank, an extremely good-natured, jovial, and extremely
dissipated rake. Two months after marriage her husband
abandoned her, and her impassioned protestations of
affection he met with a sarcasm and even hostility that
people knowing the count’s good heart, and seeing no
defects in the sentimental Lidia, were at loss to explain.
Though they were divorced and lived apart, yet whenever
the husband met the wife, he invariably behaved to her
with the same malignant irony, the cause of which was
incomprehensible.
Countess Lidia Ivanovna had long given up being in
love with her husband, but from that time she had never
given up being in love with someone. She was in love
with several people at once, both men and women; she
had been in love with almost everyone who had been
particularly distinguished in any way. She was in love with
all the new princes and princesses who married into the
imperial family; she had been in love with a high dignitary
of the Church, a vicar, and a parish priest; she had been in
Anna Karenina
1114 of 1759
love with a journalist, three Slavophiles, with Komissarov,
with a minister, a doctor, an English missionary and
Karenin. All these passions constantly waning or growing
more ardent, did not prevent her from keeping up the
most extended and complicated relations with the court
and fashionable society. But from the time that after
Karenin’s trouble she took him under her special
protection, from the time that she set to work in Karenin’s
household looking after his welfare, she felt that all her
other attachments were not the real thing, and that she
was now genuinely in love, and with no one but Karenin.
The feeling she now experienced for him seemed to her
stronger than any of her former feelings. Analyzing her
feeling, and comparing it with former passions, she
distinctly perceived that she would not have been in love
with Komissarov if he had not saved the life of the Tsar,
that she would not have been in love with RistitchKudzhitsky if there had been no Slavonic question, but
that she loved Karenin for himself, for his lofty,
uncomprehended soul, for the sweet—to her—high notes
of his voice, for his drawling intonation, his weary eyes,
his character, and his soft white hands with their swollen
veins. She was not simply overjoyed at meeting him, but
she sought in his face signs of the impression she was
Anna Karenina
1115 of 1759
making on him. She tried to please him, not by her words
only, but in her whole person. For his sake it was that she
now lavished more care on her dress than before. She
caught herself in reveries on what might have been, if she
had not been married and he had been free. She blushed
with emotion when he came into the room, she could not
repress a smile of rapture when he said anything amiable to
her.
For several days now Countess Lidia Ivanovna had
been in a state of intense excitement. She had learned that
Anna and Vronsky were in Petersburg. Alexey
Alexandrovitch must be saved from seeing her, he must be
saved even from the torturing knowledge that that awful
woman was in the same town with him, and that he might
meet her any minute.
Lidia Ivanovna made inquiries through her friends as to
what those infamous people, as she called Anna and
Vronsky, intended doing, and she endeavored so to guide
every movement of her friend during those days that he
could not come across them. The young adjutant, an
acquaintance of Vronsky, through whom she obtained her
information, and who hoped through Countess Lidia
Ivanovna to obtain a concession, told her that they had
finished their business and were going away next day.
Anna Karenina
1116 of 1759
Lidia Ivanovna had already begun to calm down, when
the next morning a note was brought her, the handwriting
of which she recognized with horror. It was the
handwriting of Anna Karenina. The envelope was of paper
as thick as bark; on the oblong yellow paper there was a
huge monogram, and the letter smelt of agreeable scent.
‘Who brought it?’
‘A commissionaire from the hotel.’
It was some time before Countess Lidia Ivanovna could
sit down to read the letter. Her excitement brought on an
attack of asthma, to which she was subject. When she had
recovered her composure, she read the following letter in
French:
‘Madame la Comtesse,
‘The Christian feelings with which your heart is filled
give me the, I feel, unpardonable boldness to write to you.
I am miserable at being separated from my son. I entreat
permission to see him once before my departure. Forgive
me for recalling myself to your memory. I apply to you
and not to Alexey Alexandrovitch, simply because I do
not wish to cause that generous man to suffer in
remembering me. Knowing your friendship for him, I
know you will understand me. Could you send Seryozha
to me, or should I come to the house at some fixed hour,
Anna Karenina
1117 of 1759
or will you let me know when and where I could see him
away from home? I do not anticipate a refusal, knowing
the magnanimity of him with whom it rests. You cannot
conceive the craving I have to see him, and so cannot
conceive the gratitude your help will arouse in me.
Anna.’
Everything in this letter exasperated Countess Lidia
Ivanovna: its contents and the allusion to magnanimity,
and especially its free and easy—as she considered—tone.
‘Say that there is no answer,’ said Countess Lidia
Ivanovna, and immediately opening her blotting-book,
she wrote to Alexey Alexandrovitch that she hoped to see
him at one o’clock at the levee.
‘I must talk with you of a grave and painful subject.
There we will arrange where to meet. Best of all at my
house, where I will order tea as you like it. Urgent. He
lays the cross, but He gives the strength to bear it,’ she
added, so as to give him some slight preparation. Countess
Lidia Ivanovna usually wrote some two or three letters a
day to Alexey Alexandrovitch. She enjoyed that form of
communication, which gave opportunity for a refinement
and air of mystery not afforded by their personal
interviews.
Anna Karenina
1118 of 1759
Chapter 24
The levee was drawing to a close. People met as they
were going away, and gossiped of the latest news, of the
newly bestowed honors and the changes in the positions
of the higher functionaries.
‘If only Countess Marya Borissovna were Minister of
War, and Princess Vatkovskaya were Commander-inChief,’ said a gray-headed, little old man in a goldembroidered uniform, addressing a tall, handsome maid of
honor who had questioned him about the new
appointments.
‘And me among the adjutants,’ said the maid of honor,
smiling.
‘You have an appointment already. You’re over the
ecclesiastical department. And your assistant’s Karenin.’
‘Good-day, prince!’ said the little old man to a man
who came up to him.
‘What were you saying of Karenin?’ said the prince.
‘He and Putyatov have received the Alexander
Nevsky.’
‘I thought he had it already.’
Anna Karenina
1119 of 1759
‘No. Just look at him,’ said the little old man, pointing
with his embroidered hat to Karenin in a court uniform
with the new red ribbon across his shoulders, standing in
the doorway of the hall with an influential member of the
Imperial Council. ‘Pleased and happy as a brass farthing,’
he added, stopping to shake hands with a handsome
gentleman of the bedchamber of colossal proportions.
‘No; he’s looking older,’ said the gentleman of the
bedchamber.
‘From overwork. He’s always drawing up projects
nowadays. He won’t let a poor devil go nowadays till he’s
explained it all to him under heads.’
‘Looking older, did you say? Il fait des passions. I
believe Countess Lidia Ivanovna’s jealous now of his wife.’
‘Oh, come now, please don’t say any harm of Countess
Lidia Ivanovna.’
‘Why, is there any harm in her being in love with
Karenin?’
‘But is it true Madame Karenina’s here?’
‘Well, not here in the palace, but in Petersburg. I met
her yesterday with Alexey Vronsky, bras dessous, bras
dessous, in the Morsky.’
‘C’est un homme qui n’a pas...’ the gentleman of the
bedchamber was beginning, but he stopped to make
Anna Karenina
1120 of 1759
room, bowing, for a member of the Imperial family to
pass.
Thus people talked incessantly of Alexey
Alexandrovitch, finding fault with him and laughing at
him, while he, blocking up the way of the member of the
Imperial Council he had captured, was explaining to him
point by point his new financial project, never
interrupting his discourse for an instant for fear he should
escape.
Almost at the same time that his wife left Alexey
Alexandrovitch there had come to him that bitterest
moment in the life of an official—the moment when his
upward career comes to a full stop. This full stop had
arrived and everyone perceived it, but Alexey
Alexandrovitch himself was not yet aware that his career
was over. Whether it was due to his feud with Stremov,
or his misfortune with his wife, or simply that Alexey
Alexandrovitch had reached his destined limits, it had
become evident to everyone in the course of that year that
his career was at an end. He still filled a position of
consequence, he sat on many commissions and
committees, but he was a man whose day was over, and
from whom nothing was expected. Whatever he said,
whatever he proposed, was heard as though it were
Anna Karenina
1121 of 1759
something long familiar, and the very thing that was not
needed. But Alexey Alexandrovitch was not aware of this,
and, on the contrary, being cut off from direct
participation in governmental activity, he saw more clearly
than ever the errors and defects in the action of others, and
thought it his duty to point out means for their correction.
Shortly after his separation from his wife, he began writing
his first note on the new judicial procedure, the first of the
endless series of notes he was destined to write in the
future.
Alexey Alexandrovitch did not merely fail to observe
his hopeless position in the official world, he was not
merely free from anxiety on this head, he was positively
more satisfied than ever with his own activity.
‘He that is unmarried careth for the things that belong
to the Lord, how he may please the Lord: But he that is
married careth for the things that are of the world, how he
may please his wife,’ says the Apostle Paul, and Alexey
Alexandrovitch, who was now guided in every action by
Scripture, often recalled this text. It seemed to him that
ever since he had been left without a wife, he had in these
very projects of reform been serving the Lord more
zealously than before.
Anna Karenina
1122 of 1759
The unmistakable impatience of the member of the
Council trying to get away from him did not trouble
Alexey Alexandrovitch; he gave up his exposition only
when the member of the Council, seizing his chance
when one of the Imperial family was passing, slipped away
from him.
Left alone, Alexey Alexandrovitch looked down,
collecting his thoughts, then looked casually about him
and walked towards the door, where he hoped to meet
Countess Lidia Ivanovna.
‘And how strong they all are, how sound physically,’
thought Alexey Alexandrovitch, looking at the powerfully
built gentleman of the bedchamber with his well-combed,
perfumed whiskers, and at the red neck of the prince,
pinched by his tight uniform. He had to pass them on his
way. ‘Truly is it said that all the world is evil,’ he thought,
with another sidelong glance at the calves of the
gentleman of the bedchamber.
Moving forward deliberately, Alexey Alexandrovitch
bowed with his customary air of weariness and dignity to
the gentleman who had been talking about him, and
looking towards the door, his eyes sought Countess Lidia
Ivanovna.
Anna Karenina
1123 of 1759
‘Ah! Alexey Alexandrovitch!’ said the little old man,
with a malicious light in his eyes, at the moment when
Karenin was on a level with them, and was nodding with
a frigid gesture, ‘I haven’t congratulated you yet,’ said the
old man, pointing to his newly received ribbon.
‘Thank you,’ answered Alexey Alexandrovitch. ‘What
an EXQUISITE day to-day,’ he added, laying emphasis in
his peculiar way on the word EXQUISITE.
That they laughed at him he was well aware, but he did
not expect anything but hostility from them; he was used
to that by now.
Catching sight of the yellow shoulders of Lidia
Ivanovna jutting out above her corset, and her fine
pensive eyes bidding him to her, Alexey Alexandrovitch
smiled, revealing untarnished white teeth, and went
towards her.
Lidia Ivanovna’s dress had cost her great pains, as
indeed all her dresses had done of late. Her aim in dress
was now quite the reverse of that she had pursued thirty
years before. Then her desire had been to adorn herself
with something, and the more adorned the better. Now,
on the contrary, she was perforce decked out in a way so
inconsistent with her age and her figure, that her one
anxiety was to contrive that the contrast between these
Anna Karenina
1124 of 1759
adornments and her own exterior should not be too
appalling. And as far as Alexey Alexandrovitch was
concerned she succeeded, and was in his eyes attractive.
For him she was the one island not only of goodwill to
him, but of love in the midst of the sea of hostility and
jeering that surrounded him.
Passing through rows of ironical eyes, he was drawn as
naturally to her loving glance as a plant to the sun.
‘I congratulate you,’ she said to him, her eyes on his
ribbon.
Suppressing a smile of pleasure, he shrugged his
shoulders, closing his eyes, as though to say that that could
not be a source of joy to him. Countess Lidia Ivanovna
was very well aware that it was one of his chief sources of
satisfaction, though he never admitted it.
‘How is our angel?’ said Countess Lidia Ivanovna,
meaning Seryozha.
‘I can’t say I was quite pleased with him,’ said Alexey
Alexandrovitch, raising his eyebrows and opening his eyes.
‘And Sitnikov is not satisfied with him.’ (Sitnikov was the
tutor to whom Seryozha’s secular education had been
intrusted.) ‘As I have mentioned to you, there’s a sort of
coldness in him towards the most important questions
which ought to touch the heart of every man and every
Anna Karenina
1125 of 1759
child....’ Alexey Alexandrovitch began expounding his
views on the sole question that interested him besides the
service—the education of his son.
When Alexey Alexandrovitch with Lidia Ivanovna’s
help had been brought back anew to life and activity, he
felt it his duty to undertake the education of the son left
on his hands. Having never before taken any interest in
educational questions, Alexey Alexandrovitch devoted
some time to the theoretical study of the subject. After
reading several books on anthropology, education, and
didactics, Alexey Alexandrovitch drew up a plan of
education, and engaging the best tutor in Petersburg to
superintend it, he set to work, and the subject continually
absorbed him.
‘Yes, but the heart. I see in him his father’s heart, and
with such a heart a child cannot go far wrong,’ said Lidia
Ivanovna with enthusiasm.
‘Yes, perhaps.... As for me, I do my duty. It’s all I can
do.’
‘You’re coming to me,’ said Countess Lidia Ivanovna,
after a pause; ‘we have to speak of a subject painful for
you. I would give anything to have spared you certain
memories, but others are not of the same mind. I have
received a letter from HER. SHE is here in Petersburg.’
Anna Karenina
1126 of 1759
Alexey Alexandrovitch shuddered at the allusion to his
wife, but immediately his face assumed the deathlike
rigidity which expressed utter helplessness in the matter.
‘I was expecting it,’ he said.
Countess Lidia Ivanovna looked at him ecstatically, and
tears of rapture at the greatness of his soul came into her
eyes.
Anna Karenina
1127 of 1759
Chapter 25
When Alexey Alexandrovitch came into the Countess
Lidia Ivanovna’s snug little boudoir, decorated with old
china and hung with portraits, the lady herself had not yet
made her appearance.
She was changing her dress.
A cloth was laid on a round table, and on it stood a
china tea service and a silver spirit-lamp and tea kettle.
Alexey Alexandrovitch looked idly about at the endless
familiar portraits which adorned the room, and sitting
down to the table, he opened a New Testament lying
upon it. The rustle of the countess’s silk skirt drew his
attention off.
‘Well now, we can sit quietly,’ said Countess Lidia
Ivanovna, slipping hurriedly with an agitated smile
between the table and the sofa, ‘and talk over our tea.’
After some words of preparation, Countess Lidia
Ivanovna, breathing hard and flushing crimson, gave into
Alexey Alexandrovitch’s hands the letter she had received.
After reading the letter, he sat a long while in silence.
‘I don’t think I have the right to refuse her,’ he said,
timidly lifting his eyes.
Anna Karenina
1128 of 1759
‘Dear friend, you never see evil in anyone!’
‘On the contrary, I see that all is evil. But whether it is
just..’
His face showed irresolution, and a seeking for counsel,
support, and guidance in a matter he did not understand.
‘No,’ Countess Lidia Ivanovna interrupted him; ‘there
are limits to everything. I can understand immorality,’ she
said, not quite truthfully, since she never could understand
that which leads women to immorality; ‘but I don’t
understand cruelty: to whom? to you! How can she stay in
the town where you are? No, the longer one lives the
more one learns. And I’m learning to understand your
loftiness and her baseness.’
‘Who is to throw a stone?’ said Alexey Alexandrovitch,
unmistakably pleased with the part he had to play. ‘I have
forgiven all, and so I cannot deprive her of what is exacted
by love in her—by her love for her son...’
‘But is that love, my friend? Is it sincere? Admitting
that you have forgiven—that you forgive—have we the
right to work on the feelings of that angel? He looks on
her as dead. He prays for her, and beseeches God to have
mercy on her sins. And it is better so. But now what will
he think?’
Anna Karenina
1129 of 1759
‘I had not thought of that,’ said Alexey Alexandrovitch,
evidently agreeing.
Countess Lidia Ivanovna hid her face in her hands and
was silent. she was praying.
‘If you ask my advice,’ she said, having finished her
prayer and uncovered her face, ‘I do not advise you to do
this. Do you suppose I don’t see how you are suffering,
how this has torn open your wounds? But supposing that,
as always, you don’t think of yourself, what can it lead
to?—to fresh suffering for you, to torture for the child. If
there were a trace of humanity left in her, she ought not
to wish for it herself. No, I have no hesitation in saying I
advise not, and if you will intrust it to me, I will write to
her.’
And Alexey Alexandrovitch consented, and Countess
Lidia Ivanovna sent the following letter in French:
‘Dear Madame,
‘To be reminded of you might have results for your son
in leading to questions on his part which could not be
answered without implanting in the child’s soul a spirit of
censure towards what should be for him sacred, and
therefore I beg you to interpret your husband’s refusal in
the spirit of Christian love. I pray to Almighty God to
have mercy on you.
Anna Karenina
1130 of 1759
Countess Lidia.’
This letter attained the secret object which Countess
Lidia Ivanovna had concealed from herself. It wounded
Anna to the quick.
For his part, Alexey Alexandrovitch, on returning
home from Lidia Ivanovna’s, could not all that day
concentrate himself on his usual pursuits, and find that
spiritual peace of one saved and believing which he had
felt of late.
The thought of his wife, who had so greatly sinned
against him, and towards whom he had been so saintly, as
Countess Lidia Ivanovna had so justly told him, ought not
to have troubled him; but he was not easy; he could not
understand the book he was reading; he could not drive
away harassing recollections of his relations with her, of
the mistake which, as it now seemed, he had made in
regard to her. The memory of how he had received her
confession of infidelity on their way home from the races
(especially that he had insisted only on the observance of
external decorum, and had not sent a challenge) tortured
him like a remorse. He was tortured too by the thought of
the letter he had written her; and most of all, his
forgiveness, which nobody wanted, and his care of the
Anna Karenina
1131 of 1759
other man’s child made his heart burn with shame and
remorse.
And just the same feeling of shame and regret he felt
now, as he reviewed all his past with her, recalling the
awkward words in which, after long wavering, he had
made her an offer.
‘But how have I been to blame?’ he said to himself.
And this question always excited another question in
him—whether they felt differently, did their loving and
marrying differently, these Vronskys and Oblonskys...these
gentlemen of the bedchamber, with their fine calves. And
there passed before his mind a whole series of these
mettlesome, vigorous, self- confident men, who always
and everywhere drew his inquisitive attention in spite of
himself. He tried to dispel these thoughts, he tried to
persuade himself that he was not living for this transient
life, but for the life of eternity, and that there was peace
and love in his heart.
But the fact that he had in this transient, trivial life
made, as it seemed to him, a few trivial mistakes tortured
him as though the eternal salvation in which he believed
had no existence. But this temptation did not last long,
and soon there was reestablished once more in Alexey
Alexandrovitch’s soul the peace and the elevation by
Anna Karenina
1132 of 1759
virtue of which he could forget what he did not want to
remember.
Anna Karenina
1133 of 1759
Chapter 26
‘Well, Kapitonitch?’ said Seryozha, coming back rosy
and good- humored from his walk the day before his
birthday, and giving his overcoat to the tall old hall porter,
who smiled down at the little person from the height of
his long figure. ‘Well, has the bandaged clerk been here
today? Did papa see him?’
‘He saw him. The minute the chief secretary came out,
I announced him,’ said the hall porter with a goodhumored wink. ‘Here, I’ll take it off.’
‘Seryozha!’ said the tutor, stopping in the doorway
leading to the inner rooms. ‘Take it off yourself.’ But
Seryozha, though he heard his tutor’s feeble voice, did not
pay attention to it. He stood keeping hold of the hall
porter’s belt, and gazing into his face.
‘Well, and did papa do what he wanted for him?’
The hall porter nodded his head affirmatively. The
clerk with his face tied up, who had already been seven
times to ask some favor of Alexey Alexandrovitch,
interested both Seryozha and the hall porter. Seryozha had
come upon him in the hall, and had heard him plaintively
Anna Karenina
1134 of 1759
beg the hall porter to announce him, saying that he and
his children had death staring them in the face.
Since then Seryozha, having met him a second time in
the hall, took great interest in him.
‘Well, was he very glad?’ he asked.
‘Glad? I should think so! Almost dancing as he walked
away.’
‘And has anything been left?’ asked Seryozha, after a
pause.
‘Come, sir,’ said the hall-porter; then with a shake of
his head he whispered, ‘Something from the countess.’
Seryozha understood at once that what the hall porter
was speaking of was a present from Countess Lidia
Ivanovna for his birthday.
‘What do you say? Where?’
‘Korney took it to your papa. A fine plaything it must
be too!’
‘How big? Like this?’
‘Rather small, but a fine thing.’
‘A book.’
‘No, a thing. Run along, run along, Vassily Lukitch is
calling you,’ said the porter, hearing the tutor’s steps
approaching, and carefully taking away from his belt the
Anna Karenina
1135 of 1759
little hand in the glove half pulled off, he signed with his
head towards the tutor.
‘Vassily Lukitch, in a tiny minute!’ answered Seryozha
with that gay and loving smile which always won over the
conscientious Vassily Lukitch.
Seryozha was too happy, everything was too delightful
for him to be able to help sharing with his friend the
porter the family good fortune of which he had heard
during his walk in the public gardens from Lidia
Ivanovna’s niece. This piece of good news seemed to him
particularly important from its coming at the same time
with the gladness of the bandaged clerk and his own
gladness at toys having come for him. It seemed to
Seryozha that this was a day on which everyone ought to
be glad and happy.
‘You know papa’s received the Alexander Nevsky
today?’
‘To be sure I do! People have been already to
congratulate him.’
‘And is he glad?’
‘Glad at the Tsar’s gracious favor! I should think so! It’s
a proof he’s deserved it,’ said the porter severely and
seriously.
Anna Karenina
1136 of 1759
Seryozha fell to dreaming, gazing up at the face of the
porter, which he had thoroughly studied in every detail,
especially the chin that hung down between the gray
whiskers, never seen by anyone but Seryozha, who saw
him only from below.
‘Well, and has your daughter been to see you lately?’
The porter’s daughter was a ballet dancer.
‘When is she to come on week-days? They’ve their
lessons to learn too. And you’ve your lesson, sir; run
along.’
On coming into the room, Seryozha, instead of sitting
down to his lessons, told his tutor of his supposition that
what had been brought him must be a machine. ‘What do
you think?’ he inquired.
But Vassily Lukitch was thinking of nothing but the
necessity of learning the grammar lesson for the teacher,
who was coming at two.
‘No, do just tell me, Vassily Lukitch,’ he asked
suddenly, when he was seated at their work table with the
book in his hands, ‘what is greater than the Alexander
Nevsky? You know papa’s received the Alexander
Nevsky?’
Vassily Lukitch replied that the Vladimir was greater
than the Alexander Nevsky.
Anna Karenina
1137 of 1759
‘And higher still?’
‘Well, highest of all is the Andrey Pervozvanny.’
‘And higher than the Andrey?’
‘I don’t know.’
‘What, you don’t know?’ and Seryozha, leaning on his
elbows, sank into deep meditation.
His meditations were of the most complex and diverse
character. He imagined his father’s having suddenly been
presented with both the Vladimir and the Andrey today,
and in consequence being much better tempered at his
lesson, and dreamed how, when he was grown up, he
would himself receive all the orders, and what they might
invent higher than the Andrey. Directly any higher order
were invented, he would win it. They would make a
higher one still, and he would immediately win that too.
The time passed in such meditations, and when the
teacher came, the lesson about the adverbs of place and
time and manner of action was not ready, and the teacher
was not only displeased, but hurt. This touched Seryozha.
He felt he was not to blame for not having learned the
lesson; however much he tried, he was utterly unable to
do that. As long as the teacher was explaining to him, he
believed him and seemed to comprehend, but as soon as
he was left alone, he was positively unable to recollect and
Anna Karenina
1138 of 1759
to understand that the short and familiar word ‘suddenly’ is
an adverb of manner of action. Still he was sorry that he
had disappointed the teacher.
He chose a moment when the teacher was looking in
silence at the book.
‘Mihail Ivanitch, when is your birthday?’ he asked all,
of a sudden.
‘You’d much better be thinking about your work.
Birthdays are of no importance to a rational being. It’s a
day like any other on which one has to do one’s work.’
Seryozha looked intently at the teacher, at his scanty
beard, at his spectacles, which had slipped down below the
ridge on his nose, and fell into so deep a reverie that he
heard nothing of what the teacher was explaining to him.
He knew that the teacher did not think what he said; he
felt it from the tone in which it was said. ‘But why have
they all agreed to speak just in the same manner always the
dreariest and most useless stuff? Why does he keep me off;
why doesn’t he love me?’ he asked himself mournfully,
and could not think of an answer.
Anna Karenina
1139 of 1759
Chapter 27
After the lesson with the grammar teacher came his
father’s lesson. While waiting for his father, Seryozha sat at
the table playing with a penknife, and fell to dreaming.
Among Seryozha’s favorite occupations was searching for
his mother during his walks. He did not believe in death
generally, and in her death in particular, in spite of what
Lidia Ivanovna had told him and his father had confirmed,
and it was just because of that, and after he had been told
she was dead, that he had begun looking for her when out
for a walk. Every woman of full, graceful figure with dark
hair was his mother. At the sight of such a woman such a
feeling of tenderness was stirred within him that his breath
failed him, and tears came into his eyes. And he was on
the tiptoe of expectation that she would come up to him,
would lift her veil. All her face would be visible, she
would smile, she would hug him, he would sniff her
fragrance, feel the softness of her arms, and cry with
happiness, just as he had one evening lain on her lap while
she tickled him, and he laughed and bit her white, ringcovered fingers. Later, when he accidentally learned from
his old nurse that his mother was not dead, and his father
Anna Karenina
1140 of 1759
and Lidia Ivanovna had explained to him that she was
dead to him because she was wicked (which he could not
possibly believe, because he loved her), he went on
seeking her and expecting her in the same way. That day
in the public gardens there had been a lady in a lilac veil,
whom he had watched with a throbbing heart, believing it
to be she as she came towards them along the path. The
lady had not come up to them, but had disappeared
somewhere. That day, more intensely than ever, Seryozha
felt a rush of love for her, and now, waiting for his father,
he forgot everything, and cut all round the edge of the
table with his penknife, staring straight before him with
sparkling eyes and dreaming of her.
‘Here is your papa!’ said Vassily Lukitch, rousing him.
Seryozha jumped up and went up to his father, and
kissing his hand, looked at him intently, trying to discover
signs of his joy at receiving the Alexander Nevsky.
‘Did you have a nice walk?’ said Alexey
Alexandrovitch, sitting down in his easy chair, pulling the
volume of the Old Testament to him and opening it.
Although Alexey Alexandrovitch had more than once told
Seryozha that every Christian ought to know Scripture
history thoroughly, he often referred to the Bible himself
during the lesson, and Seryozha observed this.
Anna Karenina
1141 of 1759
‘Yes, it was very nice indeed, papa,’ said Seryozha,
sitting sideways on his chair and rocking it, which was
forbidden. ‘I saw Nadinka’ (Nadinka was a niece of Lidia
Ivanovna’s who was being brought up in her house). ‘She
told me you’d been given a new star. Are you glad, papa?’
‘First of all, don’t rock your chair, please,’ said Alexey
Alexandrovitch. ‘And secondly, it’s not the reward that’s
precious, but the work itself. And I could have wished
you understood that. If you now are going to work, to
study in order to win a reward, then the work will seem
hard to you; but when you work’ (Alexey Alexandrovitch,
as he spoke, thought of how he had been sustained by a
sense of duty through the wearisome labor of the
morning, consisting of signing one hundred and eighty
papers), ‘loving your work, you will find your reward in
it.’
Seryozha’s eyes, that had been shining with gaiety and
tenderness, grew dull and dropped before his father’s gaze.
This was the same long-familiar tone his father always
took with him, and Seryozha had learned by now to fall in
with it. His father always talked to him—so Seryozha
felt—as though he were addressing some boy of his own
imagination, one of those boys that exist in books, utterly
Anna Karenina
1142 of 1759
unlike himself. And Seryozha always tried with his father
to act being the story-book boy.
‘You understand that, I hope?’ said his father.
‘Yes, papa,’ answered Seryozha, acting the part of the
imaginary boy.
The lesson consisted of learning by heart several verses
out of the Gospel and the repetition of the beginning of
the Old Testament. The verses from the Gospel Seryozha
knew fairly well, but at the moment when he was saying
them he became so absorbed in watching the sharply
protruding, bony knobbiness of his father’s forehead, that
he lost the thread, and he transposed the end of one verse
and the beginning of another. So it was evident to Alexey
Alexandrovitch that he did not understand what he was
saying, and that irritated him.
He frowned, and began explaining what Seryozha had
heard many times before and never could remember,
because he understood it too well, just as that ‘suddenly’ is
an adverb of manner of action. Seryozha looked with
scared eyes at his father, and could think of nothing but
whether his father would make him repeat what he had
said, as he sometimes did. And this thought so alarmed
Seryozha that he now understood nothing. But his father
did not make him repeat it, and passed on to the lesson
Anna Karenina
1143 of 1759
out of the Old Testament. Seryozha recounted the events
themselves well enough, but when he had to answer
questions as to what certain events prefigured, he knew
nothing, though he had already been punished over this
lesson. The passage at which he was utterly unable to say
anything, and began fidgeting and cutting the table and
swinging his chair, was where he had to repeat the
patriarchs before the Flood. He did not know one of
them, except Enoch, who had been taken up alive to
heaven. Last time he had remembered their names, but
now he had forgotten them utterly, chiefly because Enoch
was the personage he liked best in the whole of the Old
Testament, and Enoch’s translation to heaven was
connected in his mind with a whole long train of thought,
in which he became absorbed now while he gazed with
fascinated eyes at his father’s watch-chain and a halfunbuttoned button on his waistcoat.
In death, of which they talked to him so often,
Seryozha disbelieved entirely. He did not believe that
those he loved could die, above all that he himself would
die. That was to him something utterly inconceivable and
impossible. But he had been told that all men die; he had
asked people, indeed, whom he trusted, and they too, had
confirmed it; his old nurse, too, said the same, though
Anna Karenina
1144 of 1759
reluctantly. But Enoch had not died, and so it followed
that everyone did not die. ‘And why cannot anyone else
so serve God and be taken alive to heaven?’ thought
Seryozha. Bad people, that is those Seryozha did not like,
they might die, but the good might all be like Enoch.
‘Well, what are the names of the patriarchs?’
‘Enoch, Enos—‘
‘But you have said that already. This is bad, Seryozha,
very bad. If you don’t try to learn what is more necessary
than anything for a Christian,’ said his father, getting up,
‘whatever can interest you? I am displeased with you, and
Piotr Ignatitch’ (this was the most important of his
teachers) ‘is displeased with you.... I shall have to punish
you.’
His father and his teacher were both displeased with
Seryozha, and he certainly did learn his lessons very badly.
But still it could not be said he was a stupid boy. On the
contrary, he was far cleverer than the boys his teacher held
up as examples to Seryozha. In his father’s opinion, he did
not want to learn what he was taught. In reality he could
not learn that. He could not, because the claims of his
own soul were more binding on him than those claims his
father and his teacher made upon him. Those claims were
in opposition, and he was in direct conflict with his
Anna Karenina
1145 of 1759
education. He was nine years old; he was a child; but he
knew his own soul, it was precious to him, he guarded it
as the eyelid guards the eye, and without the key of love
he let no one into his soul. His teachers complained that
he would not learn, while his soul was brimming over
with thirst for knowledge. And he learned from
Kapitonitch, from his nurse, from Nadinka, from Vassily
Lukitch, but not from his teachers. The spring his father
and his teachers reckoned upon to turn their mill-wheels
had long dried up at the source, but its waters did their
work in another channel.
His father punished Seryozha by not letting him go to
see Nadinka, Lidia Ivanovna’s niece; but this punishment
turned out happily for Seryozha. Vassily Lukitch was in a
good humor, and showed him how to make windmills.
The whole evening passed over this work and in dreaming
how to make a windmill on which he could turn
himself—clutching at the sails or tying himself on and
whirling round. Of his mother Seryozha did not think all
the evening, but when he had gone to bed, he suddenly
remembered her, and prayed in his own words that his
mother tomorrow for his birthday might leave off hiding
herself and come to him.
Anna Karenina
1146 of 1759
‘Vassily Lukitch, do you know what I prayed for
tonight extra besides the regular things?’
‘That you might learn your lessons better?’
‘No.’
‘Toys?’
‘No. You’ll never guess. A splendid thing; but it’s a
secret! When it comes to pass I’ll tell you. Can’t you
guess!’
‘No, I can’t guess. You tell me,’ said Vassily Lukitch
with a smile, which was rare with him. ‘Come, lie down,
I’m putting out the candle.’
‘Without the candle I can see better what I see and
what I prayed for. There! I was almost telling the secret!’
said Seryozha, laughing gaily.
When the candle was taken away, Seryozha heard and
felt his mother. She stood over him, and with loving eyes
caressed him. But then came windmills, a knife,
everything began to be mixed up, and he fell asleep.
Anna Karenina
1147 of 1759
Chapter 28
On arriving in Petersburg, Vronsky and Anna stayed at
one of the best hotels; Vronsky apart in a lower story,
Anna above with her child, its nurse, and her maid, in a
large suite of four rooms.
On the day of his arrival Vronsky went to his brother’s.
There he found his mother, who had come from Moscow
on business. His mother and sister-in-law greeted him as
usual: they asked him about his stay abroad, and talked of
their common acquaintances, but did not let drop a single
word in allusion to his connection with Anna. His brother
came the next morning to see Vronsky, and of his own
accord asked him about her, and Alexey Vronsky told him
directly that he looked upon his connection with Madame
Karenina as marriage; that he hoped to arrange a divorce,
and then to marry her, and until then he considered her as
much a wife as any other wife, and he begged him to tell
their mother and his wife so.
‘If the world disapproves, I don’t care,’ said Vronsky;
‘but if my relations want to be on terms of relationship
with me, they will have to be on the same terms with my
wife.’
Anna Karenina
1148 of 1759
The elder brother, who had always a respect for his
younger brother’s judgment, could not well tell whether
he was right or not till the world had decided the
question; for his part he had nothing against it, and with
Alexey he went up to see Anna.
Before his brother, as before everyone, Vronsky
addressed Anna with a certain formality, treating her as he
might a very intimate friend, but it was understood that his
brother knew their real relations, and they talked about
Anna’s going to Vronsky’s estate.
In spite of all his social experience Vronsky was, in
consequence of the new position in which he was placed,
laboring under a strange misapprehension. One would
have thought he must have understood that society was
closed for him and Anna; but now some vague ideas had
sprung up in his brain that this was only the case in oldfashioned days, and that now with the rapidity of modern
progress (he had unconsciously become by now a partisan
of every sort of progress) the views of society had changed,
and that the question whether they would be received in
society was not a foregone conclusion. ‘Of course,’ he
thought, ‘she would not be received at court, but intimate
friends can and must look at it in the proper light.’ One
may sit for several hours at a stretch with one’s legs crossed
Anna Karenina
1149 of 1759
in the same position, if one knows that there’s nothing to
prevent one’s changing one’s position; but if a man knows
that he must remain sitting so with crossed legs, then
cramps come on, the legs begin to twitch and to strain
towards the spot to which one would like to draw them.
This was what Vronsky was experiencing in regard to the
world. Though at the bottom of his heart he knew that
the world was shut on them, he put it to the test whether
the world had not changed by now and would not receive
them. But he very quickly perceived that though the
world was open for him personally, it was closed for Anna.
Just as in the game of cat and mouse, the hands raised for
him were dropped to bar the way for Anna.
One of the first ladies of Petersburg society whom
Vronsky saw was his cousin Betsy.
‘At last!’ she greeted him joyfully. ‘And Anna? How
glad I am! Where are you stopping? I can fancy after your
delightful travels you must find our poor Petersburg
horrid. I can fancy your honeymoon in Rome. How
about the divorce? Is that all over?’
Vronsky noticed that Betsy’s enthusiasm waned when
she learned that no divorce had as yet taken place.
Anna Karenina
1150 of 1759
‘People will throw stones at me, I know,’ she said, ‘but
I shall come and see Anna; yes, I shall certainly come. You
won’t be here long, I suppose?’
And she did certainly come to see Anna the same day,
but her tone was not at all the same as in former days. She
unmistakably prided herself on her courage, and wished
Anna to appreciate the fidelity of her friendship. She only
stayed ten minutes, talking of society gossip, and on
leaving she said:
‘You’ve never told me when the divorce is to be?
Supposing I’m ready to fling my cap over the mill, other
starchy people will give you the cold shoulder until you’re
married. And that’s so simple nowadays. Ca se fait. So
you’re going on Friday? Sorry we shan’t see each other
again.’
From Betsy’s tone Vronsky might have grasped what
he had to expect from the world; but he made another
effort in his own family. His mother he did not reckon
upon. He knew that his mother, who had been so
enthusiastic over Anna at their first acquaintance, would
have no mercy on her now for having ruined her son’s
career. But he had more hope of Varya, his brother’s wife.
He fancied she would not throw stones, and would go
Anna Karenina
1151 of 1759
simply arid directly to see Anna, and would receive her in
her own house.
The day after his arrival Vronsky went to her, and
finding her alone, expressed his wishes directly.
‘You know, Alexey,’ she said after hearing him, ‘how
fond I am of you, and how ready I am to do anything for
you; but I have not spoken, because I knew I could be of
no use to you and to Anna Arkadyevna,’ she said,
articulating the name ‘Anna Arkadyevna’ with particular
care. ‘Don’t suppose, please, that I judge her. Never;
perhaps in her place I should have done the same. I don’t
and can’t enter into that,’ she said, glancing timidly at his
gloomy face. ‘But one must call things by their names.
You want me to go and see her, to ask her here, and to
rehabilitate her in society; but do understand that I
CANNOT do so. I have daughters growing up, and I
must live in the world for my husband’s sake. Well, I’m
ready to come and see Anna Arkadyevna: she will
understand that I can’t ask her here, or I should have to do
so in such a way that she would not meet people who
look at things differently; that would offend her. I can’t
raise her..’
‘Oh, I don’t regard her as fallen more than hundreds of
women you do receive!’ Vronsky interrupted her still
Anna Karenina
1152 of 1759
more gloomily, and he got up in silence, understanding
that his sister-in-law’s decision was not to be shaken.
‘Alexey! don’t be angry with me. Please understand
that I’m not to blame,’ began Varya, looking at him with a
timid smile.
‘I’m not angry with you,’ he said still as gloomily; ‘but
I’m sorry in two ways. I’m sorry, too, that this means
breaking up our friendship—if not breaking up, at least
weakening it. You will understand that for me, too, it
cannot be otherwise.’
And with that he left her.
Vronsky knew that further efforts were useless, and that
he had to spend these few days in Petersburg as though in
a strange town, avoiding every sort of relation with his
own old circle in order not to be exposed to the
annoyances and humiliations which were so intolerable to
him. One of the most unpleasant features of his position in
Petersburg was that Alexey Alexandrovitch and his name
seemed to meet him everywhere. He could not begin to
talk of anything without the conversation turning on
Alexey Alexandrovitch; he could not go anywhere
without risk of meeting him. So at least it seemed to
Vronsky, just as it seems to a man with a sore finger that
Anna Karenina
1153 of 1759
he is continually, as though on purpose, grazing his sore
finger on everything.
Their stay in Petersburg was the more painful to
Vronsky that he perceived all the time a sort of new mood
that he could not understand in Anna. At one time she
would seem in love with him, and then she would
become cold, irritable, and impenetrable. She was
worrying over something, and keeping something back
from him, and did not seem to notice the humiliations
which poisoned his existence, and for her, with her
delicate intuition, must have been still more unbearable.
Anna Karenina
1154 of 1759
Chapter 29
One of Anna’s objects in coming back to Russia had
been to see her son. From the day she left Italy the
thought of it had never ceased to agitate her. And as she
got nearer to Petersburg, the delight and importance of
this meeting grew ever greater in her imagination. She did
not even put to herself the question how to arrange it. It
seemed to her natural and simple to see her son when she
should be in the same town with him. But on her arrival
in Petersburg she was suddenly made distinctly aware of
her present position in society, and she grasped the fact
that to arrange this meeting was no easy matter.
She had now been two days in Petersburg. The
thought of her son never left her for a single instant, but
she had not yet seen him. To go straight to the house,
where she might meet Alexey Alexandrovitch, that she felt
she had no right to do. She might be refused admittance
and insulted. To write and so enter into relations with her
husband—that it made her miserable to think of doing;
she could only be at peace when she did not think of her
husband. To get a glimpse of her son out walking, finding
out where and when he went out, was not enough for
Anna Karenina
1155 of 1759
her; she had so looked forward to this meeting, she had so
much she must say to him, she so longed to embrace him,
to kiss him. Seryozha’s old nurse might be a help to her
and show her what to do. But the nurse was not now
living in Alexey Alexandrovitch’s house. In this
uncertainty, and in efforts to find the nurse, two days had
slipped by.
Hearing of the close intimacy between Alexey
Alexandrovitch and Countess Lidia Ivanovna, Anna
decided on the third day to write to her a letter, which
cost her great pains, and in which she intentionally said
that permission to see her son must depend on her
husband’s generosity. She knew that if the letter were
shown to her husband, he would keep up his character of
magnanimity, and would not refuse her request.
The commissionaire who took the letter had brought
her back the most cruel and unexpected answer, that there
was no answer. She had never felt so humiliated as at the
moment when, sending for the commissionaire, she heard
from him the exact account of how he had waited, and
how afterwards he had been told there was no answer.
Anna felt humiliated, insulted, but she saw that from her
point of view Countess Lidia Ivanovna was right. Her
suffering was the more poignant that she had to bear it in
Anna Karenina
1156 of 1759
solitude. She could not and would not share it with
Vronsky. She knew that to him, although he was the
primary cause of her distress, the question of her seeing
her son would seem a matter of very little consequence.
She knew that he would never be capable of
understanding all the depth of her suffering, that for his
cool tone at any allusion to it she would begin to hate
him. And she dreaded that more than anything in the
world, and so she hid from him everything that related to
her son. Spending the whole day at home she considered
ways of seeing her son, and had reached a decision to
write to her husband. She was just composing this letter
when she was handed the letter from Lidia Ivanovna. The
countess’s silence had subdued and depressed her, but the
letter, all that she read between the lines in it, so
exasperated her, this malice was so revolting beside her
passionate, legitimate tenderness for her son, that she
turned against other people and left off blaming herself.
‘This coldness—this pretense of feeling!’ she said to
herself. ‘They must needs insult me and torture the child,
and I am to submit to it! Not on any consideration! She is
worse than I am. I don’t lie, anyway.’ And she decided on
the spot that next day, Seryozha’s birthday, she would go
straight to her husband’s house, bribe or deceive the
Anna Karenina
1157 of 1759
servants, but at any cost see her son and overturn the
hideous deception with which they were encompassing
the unhappy child.
She went to a toy shop, bought toys and thought over
a plan of action. She would go early in the morning at
eight o’clock, when Alexey Alexandrovitch would be
certain not to be up. She would have money in her hand
to give the hall porter and the footman, so that they
should let her in, and not raising her veil, she would say
that she had come from Seryozha’s godfather to
congratulate him, and that she had been charged to leave
the toys at his bedside. She had prepared everything but
the words she should say to her son. Often as she had
dreamed of it, she could never think of anything.
The next day, at eight o’clock in the morning, Anna
got out of a hired sledge and rang at the front entrance of
her former home.
‘Run and see what’s wanted. Some lady,’ said
Kapitonitch, who, not yet dressed, in his overcoat and
galoshes, had peeped out of the window and seen a lady in
a veil standing close up to the door. His assistant, a lad
Anna did not know, had no sooner opened the door to
her than she came in, and pulling a three-rouble note out
of her muff put it hurriedly into his hand.
Anna Karenina
1158 of 1759
‘Seryozha—Sergey Alexeitch,’ she said, and was going
on. Scrutinizing the note, the porter’s assistant stopped her
at the second glass door.
‘Whom do you want?’ he asked.
She did not hear his words and made no answer.
Noticing the embarrassment of the unknown lady,
Kapitonitch went out to her, opened the second door for
her, and asked her what she was pleased to want.
‘From Prince Skorodumov for Sergey Alexeitch,’ she
said.
‘His honor’s not up yet,’ said the porter, looking at her
attentively.
Anna had not anticipated that the absolutely unchanged
hall of the house where she had lived for nine years would
so greatly affect her. Memories sweet and painful rose one
after another in her heart, and for a moment she forgot
what she was here for.
‘Would you kindly wait?’ said Kapitonitch, taking off
her fur cloak.
As he took off the cloak, Kapitonitch glanced at her
face, recognized her, and made her a low bow in silence.
‘Please walk in, your excellency,’ he said to her.
She tried to say something, but her voice refused to
utter any sound; with a guilty and imploring glance at the
Anna Karenina
1159 of 1759
old man she went with light, swift steps up the stairs. Bent
double, and his galoshes catching in the steps, Kapitonitch
ran after her, trying to overtake her.
‘The tutor’s there; maybe he’s not dressed. I’ll let him
know.’
Anna still mounted the familiar staircase, not
understanding what the old man was saying.
‘This way, to the left, if you please. Excuse its not
being tidy. His honor’s in the old parlor now,’ the hall
porter said, panting. ‘Excuse me, wait a little, your
excellency; I’ll just see,’ he said, and overtaking her, he
opened the high door and disappeared behind it. Anna
stood still waiting. ‘He’s only just awake,’ said the hall
porter, coming out. And at the very instant the porter said
this, Anna caught the sound of a childish yawn. From the
sound of this yawn alone she knew her son and seemed to
see him living before her eyes.
‘Let me in; go away!’ she said, and went in through the
high doorway. On the right of the door stood a bed, and
sitting up in the bed was the boy. His little body bent
forward with his nightshirt unbuttoned, he was stretching
and still yawning. The instant his lips came together they
curved into a blissfully sleepy smile, and with that smile he
slowly and deliciously rolled back again.
Anna Karenina
1160 of 1759
‘Seryozha!’ she whispered, going noiselessly up to him.
When she was parted from him, and all this latter time
when she had been feeling a fresh rush of love for him, she
had pictured him as he was at four years old, when she had
loved him most of all. Now he was not even the same as
when she had left him; he was still further from the fouryear-old baby, more grown and thinner. How thin his
face was, how short his hair was! What long hands! How
he had changed since she left him! But it was he with his
head, his lips, his soft neck and broad little shoulders.
‘Seryozha!’ she repeated just in the child’s ear.
He raised himself again on his elbow, turned his tangled
head from side to side as though looking for something,
and opened his eyes. Slowly and inquiringly he looked for
several seconds at his mother standing motionless before
him, then all at once he smiled a blissful smile, and
shutting his eyes, rolled not backwards but towards her
into her arms.
‘Seryozha! my darling boy!’ she said, breathing hard and
putting her arms round his plump little body. ‘Mother!’ he
said, wriggling about in her arms so as to touch her hands
with different parts of him.
Smiling sleepily still with closed eyes, he flung fat little
arms round her shoulders, rolled towards her, with the
Anna Karenina
1161 of 1759
delicious sleepy warmth and fragrance that is only found in
children, and began rubbing his face against her neck and
shoulders.
‘I know,’ he said, opening his eyes; ‘it’s my birthday
today. I knew you’d come. I’ll get up directly.’
And saying that he dropped asleep.
Anna looked at him hungrily; she saw how he had
grown and changed in her absence. She knew, and did not
know, the bare legs so long now, that were thrust out
below the quilt, those short-cropped curls on his neck in
which she had so often kissed him. She touched all this
and could say nothing; tears choked her.
‘What are you crying for, mother?’ he said, waking
completely up. ‘Mother, what are you crying for?’ he
cried in a tearful voice.
‘I won’t cry...I’m crying for joy. It’s so long since I’ve
seen you. I won’t, I won’t,’ she said, gulping down her
tears and turning away. ‘Come, it’s time for you to dress
now,’ she added, after a pause, and, never letting go his
hands, she sat down by his bedside on the chair, where his
clothes were put ready for him.
‘How do you dress without me? How...’ she tried to
begin talking simply and cheerfully, but she could not, and
again she turned away.
Anna Karenina
1162 of 1759
‘I don’t have a cold bath, papa didn’t order it. And
you’ve not seen Vassily Lukitch? He’ll come in soon.
Why, you’re sitting on my clothes!’
And Seryozha went off into a peal of laughter. She
looked at him and smiled.
‘Mother, darling, sweet one!’ he shouted, flinging
himself on her again and hugging her. It was as though
only now, on seeing her smile, he fully grasped what had
happened.
‘I don’t want that on,’ he said, taking off her hat. And
as it were, seeing her afresh without her hat, he fell to
kissing her again.
‘But what did you think about me? You didn’t think I
was dead?’
‘I never believed it.’
‘You didn’t believe it, my sweet?’
‘I knew, I knew!’ he repeated his favorite phrase, and
snatching the hand that was stroking his hair, he pressed
the open palm to his mouth and kissed it.
Anna Karenina
1163 of 1759
Chapter 30
Meanwhile Vassily Lukitch had not at first understood
who this lady was, and had learned from their
conversation that it was no other person than the mother
who had left her husband, and whom he had not seen, as
he had entered the house after her departure. He was in
doubt whether to go in or not, or whether to
communicate with Alexey Alexandrovitch. Reflecting
finally that his duty was to get Seryozha up at the hour
fixed, and that it was therefore not his business to consider
who was there, the mother or anyone else, but simply to
do his duty, he finished dressing, went to the door and
opened it.
But the embraces of the mother and child, the sound of
their voices, and what they were saying, made him change
his mind.
He shook his head, and with a sigh he closed the door.
‘I’ll wait another ten minutes,’ he said to himself, clearing
his throat and wiping away tears.
Among the servants of the household there was intense
excitement all this time. All had heard that their mistress
had come, and that Kapitonitch had let her in, and that
Anna Karenina
1164 of 1759
she was even now in the nursery, and that their master
always went in person to the nursery at nine o’clock, and
every one fully comprehended that it was impossible for
the husband and wife to meet, and that they must prevent
it. Korney, the valet, going down to the hall porter’s
room, asked who had let her in, and how it was he had
done so, and ascertaining that Kapitonitch had admitted
her and shown her up, he gave the old man a talking-to.
The hall porter was doggedly silent, but when Korney told
him he ought to be sent away, Kapitonitch darted up to
him, and waving his hands in Korney’s face, began:
‘Oh yes, to be sure you’d not have let her in! After ten
years’ service, and never a word but of kindness, and there
you’d up and say, ‘Be off, go along, get away with you!’
Oh yes, you’re a shrewd one at politics, I dare say! You
don’t need to be taught how to swindle the master, and to
filch fur coats!’
‘Soldier!’ said Korney contemptuously, and he turned
to the nurse who was coming in. ‘Here, what do you
think, Marya Efimovna: he let her in without a word to
anyone,’ Korney said addressing her. ‘Alexey
Alexandrovitch will be down immediately—and go into
the nursery!’
Anna Karenina
1165 of 1759
‘A pretty business, a pretty business!’ said the nurse.
‘You, Korney Vassilievitch, you’d best keep him some
way or other, the master, while I’ll run and get her away
somehow. A pretty business!’
When the nurse went into the nursery, Seryozha was
telling his mother how he and Nadinka had had a fall in
sledging downhill, and had turned over three times. She
was listening to the sound of his voice, watching his face
and the play of expression on it, touching his hand, but
she did not follow what he was saying. She must go, she
must leave him,—this was the only thing she was thinking
and feeling. She heard the steps of Vassily Lukitch coming
up to the door and coughing; she heard, too, the steps of
the nurse as she came near; but she sat like one turned to
stone, incapable of beginning to speak or to get up.
‘Mistress, darling!’ began the nurse, going up to Anna
and kissing her hands and shoulders. ‘God has brought joy
indeed to our boy on his birthday. You aren’t changed
one bit.’
‘Oh, nurse dear, I didn’t know you were in the house,’
said Anna, rousing herself for a moment.
‘I’m not living here, I’m living with my daughter. I
came for the birthday, Anna Arkadyevna, darling!’
Anna Karenina
1166 of 1759
The nurse suddenly burst into tears, and began kissing
her hand again.
Seryozha, with radiant eyes and smiles, holding his
mother by one hand and his nurse by the other, pattered
on the rug with his fat little bare feet. The tenderness
shown by his beloved nurse to his mother threw him into
an ecstasy.
‘Mother! She often comes to see me, and when she
comes...’ he was beginning, but he stopped, noticing that
the nurse was saying something in a whisper to his
mother, and that in his mother’s face there was a look of
dread and something like shame, which was so strangely
unbecoming to her.
She went up to him.
‘My sweet!’ she said.
She could not say good-bye, but the expression on her
face said it, and he understood. ‘Darling, darling Kootik!’
she used the name by which she had called him when he
was little, ‘you won’t forget me? You...’ but she could not
say more.
How often afterwards she thought of words she might
have said. But now she did not know how to say it, and
could say nothing. But Seryozha knew all she wanted to
say to him. He understood that she was unhappy and
Anna Karenina
1167 of 1759
loved him. He understood even what the nurse had
whispered. He had caught the words ‘always at nine
o’clock,’ and he knew that this was said of his father, and
that his father and mother could not meet. That he
understood, but one thing he could not understand—why
there should be a look of dread and shame in her face?...
She was not in fault, but she was afraid of him and
ashamed of something. He would have liked to put a
question that would have set at rest this doubt, but he did
not dare; he saw that she was miserable, and he felt for
her. Silently he pressed close to her and whispered, ‘Don’t
go yet. He won’t come just yet.’
The mother held him away from her to see what he
was thinking, what to say to him, and in his frightened
face she read not only that he was speaking of his father,
but, as it were, asking her what he ought to think about
his father.
‘Seryozha, my darling,’ she said, ‘love him; he’s better
and kinder than I am, and I have done him wrong. When
you grow up you will judge.’
‘There’s no one better than you!...’ he cried in despair
through his tears, and, clutching her by the shoulders, he
began squeezing her with all his force to him, his arms
trembling with the strain.
Anna Karenina
1168 of 1759
‘My sweet, my little one!’ said Anna, and she cried as
weakly and childishly as he.
At that moment the door opened. Vassily Lukitch came
in.
At the other door there was the sound of steps, and the
nurse in a scared whisper said, ‘He’s coming,’ and gave
Anna her hat.
Seryozha sank onto the bed and sobbed, hiding his face
in his hands. Anna removed his hands, once more kissed
his wet face, and with rapid steps went to the door. Alexey
Alexandrovitch walked in, meeting her. Seeing her, he
stopped short and bowed his head.
Although she had just said he was better and kinder
than she, in the rapid glance she flung at him, taking in his
whole figure in all its details, feelings of repulsion and
hatred for him and jealousy over her son took possession
of her. With a swift gesture she put down her veil, and,
quickening her pace, almost ran out of the room.
She had not time to undo, and so carried back with
her, the parcel of toys she had chosen the day before in a
toy shop with such love and sorrow.
Anna Karenina
1169 of 1759
Chapter 31
As intensely as Anna had longed to see her son, and
long as she had been thinking of it and preparing herself
for it, she had not in the least expected that seeing him
would affect her so deeply. On getting back to her lonely
rooms in the hotel she could not for a long while
understand why she was there. ‘Yes, it’s all over, and I am
again alone,’ she said to herself, and without taking off her
hat she sat down in a low chair by the hearth. Fixing her
eyes on a bronze clock standing on a table between the
windows, she tried to think.
The French maid brought from abroad came in to
suggest she should dress. She gazed at her wonderingly and
said, ‘Presently.’ A footman offered her coffee. ‘Later on,’
she said.
The Italian nurse, after having taken the baby out in
her best, came in with her, and brought her to Anna. The
plump, well-fed little baby, on seeing her mother, as she
always did, held out her fat little hands, and with a smile
on her toothless mouth, began, like a fish with a float,
bobbing her fingers up and down the starched folds of her
embroidered skirt, making them rustle. It was impossible
Anna Karenina
1170 of 1759
not to smile, not to kiss the baby, impossible not to hold
out a finger for her to clutch, crowing and prancing all
over; impossible not to offer her a lip which she sucked
into her little mouth by way of a kiss. And all this Anna
did, and took her in her arms and made her dance, and
kissed her fresh little cheek and bare little elbows; but at
the sight of this child it was plainer than ever to her that
the feeling she had for her could not be called love in
comparison with what she felt for Seryozha. Everything in
this baby was charming, but for some reason all this did
not go deep to her heart. On her first child, though the
child of an unloved father, had been concentrated all the
love that had never found satisfaction. Her baby girl had
been born in the most painful circumstances and had not
had a hundredth part of the care and thought which had
been
concentrated on her first child. Besides, in the little girl
everything was still in the future, while Seryozha was by
now almost a personality, and a personality dearly loved.
In him there was a conflict of thought and feeling; he
understood her, he loved her, he judged her, she thought,
recalling his words and his eyes. And she was forever—not
physically only but spiritually—divided from him, and it
was impossible to set this right.
Anna Karenina
1171 of 1759
She gave the baby back to the nurse, let her go, and
opened the locket in which there was Seryozha’s portrait
when he was almost of the same age as the girl. She got
up, and, taking off her hat, took up from a little table an
album in which there were photographs of her son at
different ages. She wanted to compare them, and began
taking them out of the album. She took them all out
except one, the latest and best photograph. In it he was in
a white smock, sitting astride a chair, with frowning eyes
and smiling lips. It was his best, most characteristic
expression. With her little supple hands, her white,
delicate fingers, that moved with a peculiar intensity
today, she pulled at a corner of the photograph, but the
photograph had caught somewhere, and she could not get
it out. There was no paper knife on the table, and so,
pulling out the photograph that was next to her son’s (it
was a photograph of Vronsky taken at Rome in a round
hat and with long hair), she used it to push out her son’s
photograph. ‘Oh, here is he!’ she said, glancing at the
portrait of Vronsky, and she suddenly recalled that he was
the cause of her present misery. She had not once thought
of him all the morning. But now, coming all at once upon
that manly, noble face, so familiar and so dear to her, she
felt a sudden rush of love for him.
Anna Karenina
1172 of 1759
‘But where is he? How is it he leaves me alone in my
misery?’ she thought all at once with a feeling of reproach,
forgetting she had herself kept from him everything
concerning her son. She sent to ask him to come to her
immediately; with a throbbing heart she awaited him,
rehearsing to herself the words in which she would tell
him all, and the expressions of love with which he would
console her. The messenger returned with the answer that
he had a visitor with him, but that he would come
immediately, and that he asked whether she would let him
bring with him Prince Yashvin, who had just arrived in
Petersburg. ‘He’s not coming alone, and since dinner
yesterday he has not seen me,’ she thought; ‘he’s not
coming so that I could tell him everything, but coming
with Yashvin.’ And all at once a strange idea came to her:
what if he had ceased to love her?
And going over the events of the last few days, it
seemed to her that she saw in everything a confirmation of
this terrible idea. The fact that he had not dined at home
yesterday, and the fact that he had insisted on their taking
separate sets of rooms in Petersburg, and that even now he
was not coming to her alone, as though he were trying to
avoid meeting her face to face.
Anna Karenina
1173 of 1759
‘But he ought to tell me so. I must know that it is so. If
I knew it, then I know what I should do,’ she said to
herself, utterly unable to picture to herself the position she
would be in if she were convinced of his not caring for
her. She thought he had ceased to love her, she felt close
upon despair, and consequently she felt exceptionally alert.
She rang for her maid and went to her dressing room. As
she dressed, she took more care over her appearance than
she had done all those days, as though he might, if he had
grown cold to her, fall in love with her again because she
had dressed and arranged her hair in the way most
becoming to her.
She heard the bell ring before she was ready. When she
went into the drawing room it was not he, but Yashvin,
who met her eyes. Vronsky was looking through the
photographs of her son, which she had forgotten on the
table, and he made no haste to look round at her.
‘We have met already,’ she said, putting her little hand
into the huge hand of Yashvin, whose bashfulness was so
queerly out of keeping with his immense frame and coarse
face. ‘We met last year at the races. Give them to me,’ she
said, with a rapid movement snatching from Vronsky the
photographs of her son, and glancing significantly at him
with flashing eyes. ‘Were the races good this year? Instead
Anna Karenina
1174 of 1759
of them I saw the races in the Corso in Rome. But you
don’t care for life abroad,’ she said with a cordial smile. ‘I
know you and all your tastes, though I have seen so little
of you.’
‘I’m awfully sorry for that, for my tastes are mostly
bad,’ said Yashvin, gnawing at his left mustache.
Having talked a little while, and noticing that Vronsky
glanced at the clock, Yashvin asked her whether she
would be staying much longer in Petersburg, and
unbending his huge figure reached after his cap.
‘Not long, I think,’ she said hesitatingly, glancing at
Vronsky.
‘So then we shan’t meet again?’
‘Come and dine with me,’ said Anna resolutely, angry
it seemed with herself for her embarrassment, but flushing
as she always did when she defined her position before a
fresh person. ‘The dinner here is not good, but at least you
will see him. There is no one of his old friends in the
regiment Alexey cares for as he does for you.’
‘Delighted,’ said Yashvin with a smile, from which
Vronsky could see that he liked Anna very much.
Yashvin said good-bye and went away; Vronsky stayed
behind.
‘Are you going too?’ she said to him.
Anna Karenina
1175 of 1759
‘I’m late already,’ he answered. ‘Run along! I’ll catch
you up in a moment,’ he called to Yashvin.
She took him by the hand, and without taking her eyes
off him, gazed at him while she ransacked her mind for
the words to say that would keep him.
‘Wait a minute, there’s something I want to say to
you,’ and taking his broad hand she pressed it on her neck.
‘Oh, was it right my asking him to dinner?’
‘You did quite right,’ he said with a serene smile that
showed his even teeth, and he kissed her hand.
‘Alexey, you have not changed to me?’ she said,
pressing his hand in both of hers. ‘Alexey, I am miserable
here. When are we going away?’
‘Soon, soon. You wouldn’t believe how disagreeable
our way of living here is to me too,’ he said, and he drew
away his hand.
‘Well, go, go!’ she said in a tone of offense, and she
walked quickly away from him.
Anna Karenina
1176 of 1759
Chapter 32
When Vronsky returned home, Anna was not yet
home. Soon after he had left, some lady, so they told him,
had come to see her, and she had gone out with her. That
she had gone out without leaving word where she was
going, that she had not yet come back, and that all the
morning she had been going about somewhere without a
word to him—all this, together with the strange look of
excitement in her face in the morning, and the
recollection of the hostile tone with which she had before
Yashvin almost snatched her son’s photographs out of his
hands, made him serious. He decided he absolutely must
speak openly with her. And he waited for her in her
drawing room. But Anna did not return alone, but
brought with her her old unmarried aunt, Princess
Oblonskaya. This was the lady who had come in the
morning, and with whom Anna had gone out shopping.
Anna appeared not to notice Vronsky’s worried and
inquiring expression, and began a lively account of her
morning’s shopping. He saw that there was something
working within her; in her flashing eyes, when they rested
for a moment on him, there was an intense concentration,
Anna Karenina
1177 of 1759
and in her words and movements there was that nervous
rapidity and grace which, during the early period of their
intimacy, had so fascinated him, but which now so
disturbed and alarmed him.
The dinner was laid for four. All were gathered
together and about to go into the little dining room when
Tushkevitch made his appearance with a message from
Princess Betsy. Princess Betsy begged her to excuse her
not having come to say good-bye; she had been
indisposed, but begged Anna to come to her between halfpast six and nine o’clock. Vronsky glanced at Anna at the
precise limit of time, so suggestive of steps having been
taken that she should meet no one; but Anna appeared not
to notice it.
‘Very sorry that I can’t come just between half-past six
and nine,’ she said with a faint smile.
‘The princess will be very sorry.’
‘And so am I.’
‘You’re going, no doubt, to hear Patti?’ said
Tushkevitch.
‘Patti? You suggest the idea to me. I would go if it
were possible to get a box.’
‘I can get one,’ Tushkevitch offered his services.
Anna Karenina
1178 of 1759
‘I should be very, very grateful to you,’ said Anna. ‘But
won’t you dine with us?’
Vronsky gave a hardly perceptible shrug. He was at a
complete loss to understand what Anna was about. What
had she brought the old Princess Oblonskaya home for,
what had she made Tushkevitch stay to dinner for, and,
most amazing of all, why was she sending him for a box?
Could she possibly think in her position of going to Patti’s
benefit, where all the circle of her acquaintances would
be? He looked at her with serious eyes, but she responded
with that defiant, half-mirthful, half-desperate look, the
meaning of which he could not comprehend. At dinner
Anna was in aggressively high spirits—she almost flirted
both with Tushkevitch and with Yashvin. When they got
up from dinner and Tushkevitch had gone to get a box at
the opera, Yashvin went to smoke, and Vronsky went
down with him to his own rooms. After sitting there for
some time he ran upstairs. Anna was already dressed in a
low-necked gown of light silk and velvet that she had had
made in Paris, and with costly white lace on her head,
framing her face, and particularly becoming, showing up
her dazzling beauty.
‘Are you really going to the theater?’ he said, trying not
to look at her.
Anna Karenina
1179 of 1759
‘Why do you ask with such alarm?’ she said, wounded
again at his not looking at her. ‘Why shouldn’t I go?’
She appeared not to understand the motive of his
words.
‘Oh, of course, there’s no reason whatever,’ he said,
frowning.
‘That’s just what I say,’ she said, willfully refusing to see
the irony of his tone, and quietly turning back her long,
perfumed glove.
‘Anna, for God’s sake! what is the matter with you?’ he
said, appealing to her exactly as once her husband had
done.
‘I don’t understand what you are asking.’
‘You know that it’s out of the question to go.’
‘Why so? I’m not going alone. Princess Varvara has
gone to dress, she is going with me.’
He shrugged his shoulders with an air of perplexity and
despair.
‘But do you mean to say you don’t know?...’ he began.
‘But I don’t care to know!’ she almost shrieked. ‘I don’t
care to. Do I regret what I have done? No, no, no! If it
were all to do again from the beginning, it would be the
same. For us, for you and for me, there is only one thing
that matters, whether we love each other. Other people
Anna Karenina
1180 of 1759
we need not consider. Why are we living here apart and
not seeing each other? Why can’t I go? I love you, and I
don’t care for anything,’ she said in Russian, glancing at
him with a peculiar gleam in her eyes that he could not
understand. ‘If you have not changed to me, why don’t
you look at me?’
He looked at her. He saw all the beauty of her face and
full dress, always so becoming to her. But now her beauty
and elegance were just what irritated him.
‘My feeling cannot change, you know, but I beg you, I
entreat you,’ he said again in French, with a note of tender
supplication in his voice, but with coldness in his eyes.
She did not hear his words, but she saw the coldness of
his eyes, and answered with irritation:
‘And I beg you to explain why I should not go.’
‘Because it might cause you...’ he hesitated.
‘I don’t understand. Yashvin n’est pas compromettant,
and Princess Varvara is no worse than others. Oh, here she
is!’
Anna Karenina
1181 of 1759
Chapter 33
Vronsky for the first time experienced a feeling of
anger against Anna, almost a hatred for her willfully
refusing to understand her own position. This feeling was
aggravated by his being unable to tell her plainly the cause
of his anger. If he had told her directly what he was
thinking, he would have said:
‘In that dress, with a princess only too well known to
everyone, to show yourself at the theater is equivalent not
merely to acknowledging your position as a fallen woman,
but is flinging down a challenge to society, that is to say,
cutting yourself off from it forever.’
He could not say that to her. ‘But how can she fail to
see it, and what is going on in her?’ he said to himself. He
felt at the same time that his respect for her was
diminished while his sense of her beauty was intensified.
He went back scowling to his rooms, and sitting down
beside Yashvin, who, with his long legs stretched out on a
chair, was drinking brandy and seltzer water, he ordered a
glass of the same for himself.
‘You were talking of Lankovsky’s Powerful. That’s a
fine horse, and I would advise you to buy him,’ said
Anna Karenina
1182 of 1759
Yashvin, glancing at his comrade’s gloomy face. ‘His hindquarters aren’t quite first-rate, but the legs and head—one
couldn’t wish for anything better.’
‘I think I will take him,’ answered Vronsky.
Their conversation about horses interested him, but he
did not for an instant forget Anna, and could not help
listening to the sound of steps in the corridor and looking
at the clock on the chimney piece.
‘Anna Arkadyevna gave orders to announce that she has
gone to the theater.’
Yashvin, tipping another glass of brandy into the
bubbling water, drank it and got up, buttoning his coat.
‘Well, let’s go,’ he said, faintly smiling under his
mustache, and showing by this smile that he knew the
cause of Vronsky’s gloominess, and did not attach any
significance to it.
‘I’m not going,’ Vronsky answered gloomily.
‘Well, I must, I promised to. Good-bye, then. If you
do, come to the stalls; you can take Kruzin’s stall,’ added
Yashvin as he went out.
‘No, I’m busy.’
‘A wife is a care, but it’s worse when she’s not a wife,’
thought Yashvin, as he walked out of the hotel.
Anna Karenina
1183 of 1759
Vronsky, left alone, got up from his chair and began
pacing up and down the room.
‘And what’s today? The fourth night.... Yegor and his
wife are there, and my mother, most likely. Of course all
Petersburg’s there. Now she’s gone in, taken off her cloak
and come into the light. Tushkevitch, Yashvin, Princess
Varvara,’ he pictured them to himself.... ‘What about me?
Either that I’m frightened or have given up to
Tushkevitch the right to protect her? From every point of
view—stupid, stupid!... And why is she putting me in such
a position?’ he said with a gesture of despair.
With that gesture he knocked against the table, on
which there was standing the seltzer water and the
decanter of brandy, and almost upset it. He tried to catch
it, let it slip, and angrily kicked the table over and rang.
‘If you care to be in my service,’ he said to the valet
who came in, ‘you had better remember your duties. This
shouldn’t be here. You ought to have cleared away.’
The valet, conscious of his own innocence, would have
defended himself, but glancing at his master, he saw from
his face that the only thing to do was to be silent, and
hurriedly threading his way in and out, dropped down on
the carpet and began gathering up the whole and broken
glasses and bottles.
Anna Karenina
1184 of 1759
‘That’s not your duty; send the waiter to clear away,
and get my dress coat out.’
Vronsky went into the theater at half-past eight. The
performance was in full swing. The little old box-keeper,
recognizing Vronsky as he helped him off with his fur
coat, called him ‘Your Excellency,’ and suggested he
should not take a number but should simply call Fyodor.
In the brightly lighted corridor there was no one but the
box-opener and two attendants with fur cloaks on their
arms listening at the doors. Through the closed doors
came the sounds of the discreet staccato accompaniment of
the orchestra, and a single female voice rendering
distinctly a musical phrase. The door opened to let the
box-opener slip through, and the phrase drawing to the
end reached Vronsky’s hearing clearly. But the doors were
closed again at once, and Vronsky did not hear the end of
the phrase and the cadence of the accompaniment, though
he knew from the thunder of applause that it was over.
When he entered the hall, brilliantly lighted with
chandeliers and gas jets, the noise was still going on. On
the stage the singer, bowing and smiling, with bare
shoulders flashing with diamonds, was, with the help of
the tenor who had given her his arm, gathering up the
bouquets that were flying awkwardly over the footlights.
Anna Karenina
1185 of 1759
Then she went up to a gentleman with glossy pomaded
hair parted down the center, who was stretching across the
footlights holding out something to her, and all the public
in the stalls as well as in the boxes was in excitement,
craning forward, shouting and clapping. The conductor in
his high chair assisted in passing the offering, and
straightened his white tie. Vronsky walked into the middle
of the stalls, and, standing still, began looking about him.
That day less than ever was his attention turned upon the
familiar, habitual surroundings, the stage, the noise, all the
familiar, uninteresting, particolored herd of spectators in
the packed theater.
There were, as always, the same ladies of some sort
with officers of some sort in the back of the boxes; the
same gaily dressed women—God knows who—and
uniforms and black coats; the same dirty crowd in the
upper gallery; and among the crowd, in the boxes and in
the front rows, were some forty of the REAL people. And
to those oases Vronsky at once directed his attention, and
with them he entered at once into relation.
The act was over when he went in, and so he did not
go straight to his brother’s box, but going up to the first
row of stalls stopped at the footlights with Serpuhovskoy,
who, standing with one knee raised and his heel on the
Anna Karenina
1186 of 1759
footlights, caught sight of him in the distance and
beckoned to him, smiling.
Vronsky had not yet seen Anna. He purposely avoided
looking in her direction. But he knew by the direction of
people’s eyes where she was. He looked round discreetly,
but he was not seeking her; expecting the worst, his eyes
sought for Alexey Alexandrovitch. To his relief Alexey
Alexandrovitch was not in the theater that evening.
‘How little of the military man there is left in you!’
Serpuhovskoy was saying to him. ‘A diplomat, an artist,
something of that sort, one would say.’
‘Yes, it was like going back home when I put on a
black coat,’ answered Vronsky, smiling and slowly taking
out his opera glass.
‘Well, I’ll own I envy you there. When I come back
from abroad and put on this,’ he touched his epaulets, ‘I
regret my freedom.’
Serpuhovskoy had long given up all hope of Vronsky’s
career, but he liked him as before, and was now
particularly cordial to him.
‘What a pity you were not in time for the first act!’
Vronsky, listening with one ear, moved his opera glass
from the stalls and scanned the boxes. Near a lady in a
turban and a bald old man, who seemed to wave angrily in
Anna Karenina
1187 of 1759
the moving opera glass, Vronsky suddenly caught sight of
Anna’s head, proud, strikingly beautiful, and smiling in the
frame of lace. She was in the fifth box, twenty paces from
him. She was sitting in front, and slightly turning, was
saying something to Yashvin. The setting of her head on
her handsome, broad shoulders, and the restrained
excitement and brilliance of her eyes and her whole face
reminded him of her just as he had seen her at the ball in
Moscow. But he felt utterly different towards her beauty
now. In his feeling for her now there was no element of
mystery, and so her beauty, though it attracted him even
more intensely than before, gave him now a sense of
injury. She was not looking in his direction, but Vronsky
felt that she had seen him already.
When Vronsky turned the opera glass again in that
direction, he noticed that Princess Varvara was particularly
red, and kept laughing unnaturally and looking round at
the next box. Anna, folding her fan and tapping it on the
red velvet, was gazing away and did not see, and obviously
did not wish to see, what was taking place in the next box.
Yashvin’s face wore the expression which was common
when he was losing at cards. Scowling, he sucked the left
end of his mustache further and further into his mouth,
and cast sidelong glances at the next box.
Anna Karenina
1188 of 1759
In that box on the left were the Kartasovs. Vronsky
knew them, and knew that Anna was acquainted with
them. Madame Kartasova, a thin little woman, was
standing up in her box, and, her back turned upon Anna,
she was putting on a mantle that her husband was holding
for her. Her face was pale and angry, and she was talking
excitedly. Kartasov, a fat, bald man, was continually
looking round at Anna, while he attempted to soothe his
wife. When the wife had gone out, the husband lingered a
long while, and tried to catch Anna’s eye, obviously
anxious to bow to her. But Anna, with unmistakable
intention, avoided noticing him, and talked to Yashvin,
whose cropped head was bent down to her. Kartasov went
out without making his salutation, and the box was left
empty.
Vronsky could not understand exactly what had passed
between the Kartasovs and Anna, but he saw that
something humiliating for Anna had happened. He knew
this both from what he had seen, and most of all from the
face of Anna, who, he could see, was taxing every nerve
to carry through the part she had taken up. And in
maintaining this attitude of external composure she was
completely successful. Anyone who did not know her and
her circle, who had not heard all the utterances of the
Anna Karenina
1189 of 1759
women expressive of commiseration, indignation, and
amazement, that she should show herself in society, and
show herself so conspicuously with her lace and her
beauty, would have admired the serenity and loveliness of
this woman without a suspicion that she was undergoing
the sensations of a man in the stocks.
Knowing that something had happened, but not
knowing precisely what, Vronsky felt a thrill of agonizing
anxiety, and hoping to find out something, he went
towards his brother’s box. Purposely choosing the way
round furthest from Anna’s box, he jostled as he came out
against the colonel of his old regiment talking to two
acquaintances. Vronsky heard the name of Madame
Karenina, and noticed how the colonel hastened to address
Vronsky loudly by name, with a meaning glance at his
companions.
‘Ah, Vronsky! When are you coming to the regiment?
We can’t let you off without a supper. You’re one of the
old set,’ said the colonel of his regiment.
‘I can’t stop, awfully sorry, another time,’ said Vronsky,
and he ran upstairs towards his brother’s box.
The old countess, Vronsky’s mother, with her steelgray curls, was in his brother’s box. Varya with the young
Princess Sorokina met him in the corridor.
Anna Karenina
1190 of 1759
Leaving the Princess Sorokina with her mother, Varya
held out her hand to her brother-in-law, and began
immediately to speak of what interested him. She was
more excited than he had ever seen her.
‘I think it’s mean and hateful, and Madame Kartasova
had no right to do it. Madame Karenina...’ she began.
‘But what is it? I don’t know.’
‘What? you’ve not heard?’
‘You know I should be the last person to hear of it.’
‘There isn’t a more spiteful creature than that Madame
Kartasova!’
‘But what did she do?’
‘My husband told me.... She has insulted Madame
Karenina. Her husband began talking to her across the
box, and Madame Kartasova made a scene. She said
something aloud, he says, something insulting, and went
away.’
‘Count, your maman is asking for you,’ said the young
Princess Sorokina, peeping out of the door of the box.
‘I’ve been expecting you all the while,’ said his mother,
smiling sarcastically. ‘You were nowhere to be seen.’
Her son saw that she could not suppress a smile of
delight.
Anna Karenina
1191 of 1759
‘Good evening, maman. I have come to you,’ he said
coldly.
‘Why aren’t you going to faire la cour a Madame
Karenina?’ she went on, when Princess Sorokina had
moved away. ‘Elle fait sensation. On oublie la Patti pour
elle.’
‘Maman, I have asked you not to say anything to me of
that,’ he answered, scowling.
‘I’m only saying what everyone’s saying.’
Vronsky made no reply, and saying a few words to
Princess Sorokina, he went away. At the door he met his
brother.
‘Ah, Alexey!’ said his brother. ‘How disgusting! Idiot of
a woman, nothing else.... I wanted to go straight to her.
Let’s go together.’
Vronsky did not hear him. With rapid steps he went
downstairs; he felt that he must do something, but he did
not know what. Anger with her for having put herself and
him in such a false position, together with pity for her
suffering, filled his heart. He went down, and made
straight for Anna’s box. At her box stood Stremov, talking
to her.
‘There are no more tenors. Le moule en est brise!’
Vronsky bowed to her and stopped to greet Stremov.
Anna Karenina
1192 of 1759
‘You came in late, I think, and have missed the best
song,’ Anna said to Vronsky, glancing ironically, he
thought, at him.
‘I am a poor judge of music,’ he said, looking sternly at
her.
‘Like Prince Yashvin,’ she said smiling, ‘who considers
that Patti sings too loud.’
‘Thank you,’ she said, her little hand in its long glove
taking the playbill Vronsky picked up, and suddenly at that
instant her lovely face quivered. She got up and went into
the interior of the box.
Noticing in the next act that her box was empty,
Vronsky, rousing indignant ‘hushes’ in the silent audience,
went out in the middle of a solo and drove home.
Anna was already at home. When Vronsky went up to
her, she was in the same dress as she had worn at the
theater. She was sitting in the first armchair against the
wall, looking straight before her. She looked at him, and
at once resumed her former position.
‘Anna,’ he said.
‘You, you are to blame for everything!’ she cried, with
tears of despair and hatred in her voice, getting up.
‘I begged, I implored you not to go, I knew it would
be unpleasant...’
Anna Karenina
1193 of 1759
‘Unpleasant!’ she cried—‘hideous! As long as I live I
shall never forget it. She said it was a disgrace to sit beside
me.’
‘A silly woman’s chatter,’ he said: ‘but why risk it, why
provoke?..’
‘I hate your calm. You ought not to have brought me
to this. If you had loved me..’
‘Anna! How does the question of my love come in?’
‘Oh, if you loved me, as I love, if you were tortured as
I am!...’ she said, looking at him with an expression of
terror.
He was sorry for her, and angry notwithstanding. He
assured her of his love because he saw that this was the
only means of soothing her, and he did not reproach her
in words, but in his heart he reproached her.
And the asseverations of his love, which seemed to him
so vulgar that he was ashamed to utter them, she drank in
eagerly, and gradually became calmer. The next day,
completely reconciled, they left for the country.
Anna Karenina
1194 of 1759
PART SIX
Anna Karenina
1195 of 1759
Chapter 1
Darya Alexandrovna spent the summer with her
children at Pokrovskoe, at her sister Kitty Levin’s. The
house on her own estate was quite in ruins, and Levin and
his wife had persuaded her to spend the summer with
them. Stepan Arkadyevitch greatly approved of the
arrangement. He said he was very sorry his official duties
prevented him from spending the summer in the country
with his family, which would have been the greatest
happiness for him; and remaining in Moscow, he came
down to the country from time to time for a day or two.
Besides the Oblonskys, with all their children and their
governess, the old princess too came to stay that summer
with the Levins, as she considered it her duty to watch
over her inexperienced daughter in her INTERESTING
CONDITION. Moreover, Varenka, Kitty’s friend abroad,
kept her promise to come to Kitty when she was married,
and stayed with her friend. All of these were friends or
relations of Levin’s wife. And though he liked them all, he
rather regretted his own Levin world and ways, which was
smothered by this influx of the ‘Shtcherbatsky element,’ as
he called it to himself. Of his own relations there stayed
with him only Sergey Ivanovitch, but he too was a man of
Anna Karenina
1196 of 1759
the Koznishev and not the Levin stamp, so that the Levin
spirit was utterly obliterated.
In the Levins’ house, so long deserted, there were now
so many people that almost all the rooms were occupied,
and almost every day it happened that the old princess,
sitting down to table, counted them all over, and put the
thirteenth grandson or granddaughter at a separate table.
And Kitty, with her careful housekeeping, had no little
trouble to get all the chickens, turkeys, and geese, of
which so many were needed to satisfy the summer
appetites of the visitors and children.
The whole family were sitting at dinner. Dolly’s
children, with their governess and Varenka, were making
plans for going to look for mushrooms. Sergey Ivanovitch,
who was looked up to by all the party for his intellect and
learning, with a respect that almost amounted to awe,
surprised everyone by joining in the conversation about
mushrooms.
‘Take me with you. I am very fond of picking
mushrooms,’ he said, looking at Varenka; ‘I think it’s a
very nice occupation.’
‘Oh, we shall be delighted,’ answered Varenka,
coloring a little. Kitty exchanged meaningful glances with
Dolly. The proposal of the learned and intellectual Sergey
Anna Karenina
1197 of 1759
Ivanovitch to go looking for mushrooms with Varenka
confirmed certain theories of Kitty’s with which her mind
had been very busy of late. She made haste to address
some remark to her mother, so that her look should not
be noticed. After dinner Sergey Ivanovitch sat with his
cup of coffee at the drawing-room window, and while he
took part in a conversation he had begun with his brother,
he watched the door through which the children would
start on the mushroom-picking expedition. Levin was
sitting in the window near his brother.
Kitty stood beside her husband, evidently awaiting the
end of a conversation that had no interest for her, in order
to tell him something.
‘You have changed in many respects since your
marriage, and for the better,’ said Sergey Ivanovitch,
smiling to Kitty, and obviously little interested in the
conversation, ‘but you have remained true to your passion
for defending the most paradoxical theories.’
‘Katya, it’s not good for you to stand,’ her husband said
to her, putting a chair for her and looking significantly at
her.
‘Oh, and there’s no time either,’ added Sergey
Ivanovitch, seeing the children running out.
Anna Karenina
1198 of 1759
At the head of them all Tanya galloped sideways, in her
tightly- drawn stockings, and waving a basket and Sergey
Ivanovitch’s hat, she ran straight up to him.
Boldly running up to Sergey Ivanovitch with shining
eyes, so like her father’s fine eyes, she handed him his hat
and made as though she would put it on for him, softening
her freedom by a shy and friendly smile.
‘Varenka’s waiting,’ she said, carefully putting his hat
on, seeing from Sergey Ivanovitch’s smile that she might
do so.
Varenka was standing at the door, dressed in a yellow
print gown, with a white kerchief on her head.
‘I’m coming, I’m coming, Varvara Andreevna,’ said
Sergey Ivanovitch, finishing his cup of coffee, and putting
into their separate pockets his handkerchief and cigar-case.
‘And how sweet my Varenka is! eh?’ said Kitty to her
husband, as soon as Sergey Ivanovitch rose. She spoke so
that Sergey Ivanovitch could hear, and it was clear that she
meant him to do so. ‘And how good-looking she is—such
a refined beauty! Varenka!’ Kitty shouted. ‘Shall you be in
the mill copse? We’ll come out to you.’
‘You certainly forget your condition, Kitty,’ said the
old princess, hurriedly coming out at the door. ‘You
mustn’t shout like that.’
Anna Karenina
1199 of 1759
Varenka, hearing Kitty’s voice and her mother’s
reprimand, went with light, rapid steps up to Kitty. The
rapidity of her movement, her flushed and eager face,
everything betrayed that something out of the common
was going on in her. Kitty knew what this was, and had
been watching her intently. She called Varenka at that
moment merely in order mentally to give her a blessing
for the important event which, as Kitty fancied, was
bound to come to pass that day after dinner in the wood.
‘Varenka, I should be very happy if a certain something
were to happen,’ she whispered as she kissed her.
‘And are you coming with us?’ Varenka said to Levin
in confusion, pretending not to have heard what had been
said.
‘I am coming, but only as far as the threshing-floor, and
there I shall stop.’
‘Why, what do you want there?’ said Kitty.
‘I must go to have a look at the new wagons, and to
check the invoice,’ said Levin; ‘and where will you be?’
‘On the terrace.’
Chapter 2
On the terrace were assembled all the ladies of the
party. They always liked sitting there after dinner, and that
day they had work to do there too. Besides the sewing and
knitting of baby clothes, with which all of them were
busy, that afternoon jam was being made on the terrace by
a method new to Agafea Mihalovna, without the addition
of water. Kitty had introduced this new method, which
had been in use in her home. Agafea Mihalovna, to whom
the task of jam-making had always been intrusted,
considering that what had been done in the Levin
household could not be amiss, had nevertheless put water
with the strawberries, maintaining that the jam could not
be made without it. She had been caught in the act, and
was now making jam before everyone, and it was to be
proved to her conclusively that jam could be very well
made without water.
Agafea Mihalovna, her face heated and angry, her hair
untidy, and her thin arms bare to the elbows, was turning
the preserving-pan over the charcoal stove, looking darkly
at the raspberries and devoutly hoping they would stick
and not cook properly. The princess, conscious that
Anna Karenina
1201 of 1759
Agafea Mihalovna’s wrath must be chiefly directed against
her, as the person responsible for the raspberry jammaking, tried to appear to be absorbed in other things and
not interested in the jam, talked of other matters, but cast
stealthy glances in the direction of the stove.
‘I always buy my maids’ dresses myself, of some cheap
material,’ the princess said, continuing the previous
conversation. ‘Isn’t it time to skim it, my dear?’ she added,
addressing Agafea Mihalovna. ‘There’s not the slightest
need for you to do it, and it’s hot for you,’ she said,
stopping Kitty.
‘I’ll do it,’ said Dolly, and getting up, she carefully
passed the spoon over the frothing sugar, and from time to
time shook off the clinging jam from the spoon by
knocking it on a plate that was covered with yellow-red
scum and blood-colored syrup. ‘How they’ll enjoy this at
tea-time!’ she thought of her children, remembering how
she herself as a child had wondered how it was the grownup people did not eat what was best of all—the scum of
the jam.
‘Stiva says it’s much better to give money.’ Dolly took
up meanwhile the weighty subject under discussion, what
presents should be made to servants. ‘But..’
Anna Karenina
1202 of 1759
‘Money’s out of the question!’ the princess and Kitty
exclaimed with one voice. ‘They appreciate a present..’
‘Well, last year, for instance, I bought our Matrona
Semyenovna, not a poplin, but something of that sort,’
said the princess.
‘I remember she was wearing it on your nameday.’
‘A charming pattern—so simple and refined,—I should
have liked it myself, if she hadn’t had it. Something like
Varenka’s. So pretty and inexpensive.’
‘Well, now I think it’s done,’ said Dolly, dropping the
syrup from the spoon.
‘When it sets as it drops, it’s ready. Cook it a little
longer, Agafea Mihalovna.’
‘The flies!’ said Agafea Mihalovna angrily. ‘It’ll be just
the same,’ she added.
‘Ah! how sweet it is! don’t frighten it!’ Kitty said
suddenly, looking at a sparrow that had settled on the step
and was pecking at the center of a raspberry.
‘Yes, but you keep a little further from the stove,’ said
her mother.
‘A propos de Varenka,’ said Kitty, speaking in French,
as they had been doing all the while, so that Agafea
Mihalovna should not understand them, ‘you know,
Anna Karenina
1203 of 1759
mamma, I somehow expect things to be settled today.
You know what I mean. How splendid it would be!’
‘But what a famous matchmaker she is!’ said Dolly.
‘How carefully and cleverly she throws them together!..’
‘No; tell me, mamma, what do you think?’
‘Why, what is one to think? He’ (HE meant Sergey
Ivanovitch) ‘might at any time have been a match for
anyone in Russia; now, of course, he’s not quite a young
man, still I know ever so many girls would be glad to
marry him even now.... She’s a very nice girl, but he
might..’
‘Oh, no, mamma, do understand why, for him and for
her too, nothing better could be imagined. In the first
place, she’s charming!’ said Kitty, crooking one of her
fingers.
‘He thinks her very attractive, that’s certain,’ assented
Dolly.
‘Then he occupies such a position in society that he has
no need to look for either fortune or position in his wife.
All he needs is a good, sweet wife—a restful one.’
‘Well, with her he would certainly be restful,’ Dolly
assented.
‘Thirdly, that she should love him. And so it is...that is,
it would be so splendid!...I look forward to seeing them
Anna Karenina
1204 of 1759
coming out of the forest—and everything settled. I shall
see at once by their eyes. I should be so delighted! What
do you think, Dolly?’
‘But don’t excite yourself. It’s not at all the thing for
you to be excited,’ said her mother.
‘Oh, I’m not excited, mamma. I fancy he will make her
an offer today.’
‘Ah, that’s so strange, how and when a man makes an
offer!... There is a sort of barrier, and all at once it’s
broken down,’ said Dolly, smiling pensively and recalling
her past with Stepan Arkadyevitch.
‘Mamma, how did papa make you an offer?’ Kitty
asked suddenly.
‘There was nothing out of the way, it was very simple,’
answered the princess, but her face beamed all over at the
recollection.
‘Oh, but how was it? You loved him, anyway, before
you were allowed to speak?’
Kitty felt a peculiar pleasure in being able now to talk
to her mother on equal terms about those questions of
such paramount interest in a woman’s life.
‘Of course I did; he had come to stay with us in the
country.’
‘But how was it settled between you, mamma?’
Anna Karenina
1205 of 1759
‘You imagine, I dare say, that you invented something
quite new? It’s always just the same: it was settled by the
eyes, by smiles..’
‘How nicely you said that, mamma! It’s just by the
eyes, by smiles that it’s done,’ Dolly assented.
‘But what words did he say?’
‘What did Kostya say to you?’
‘He wrote it in chalk. It was wonderful.... How long
ago it seems!’ she said.
And the three women all fell to musing on the same
thing. Kitty was the first to break the silence. She
remembered all that last winter before her marriage, and
her passion for Vronsky.
‘There’s one thing ...that old love affair of Varenka’s,’
she said, a natural chain of ideas bringing her to this point.
‘I should have liked to say something to Sergey
Ivanovitch, to prepare him. They’re all—all men, I mean,’
she added, ‘awfully jealous over our past.’
‘Not all,’ said Dolly. ‘You judge by your own husband.
It makes him miserable even now to remember Vronsky.
Eh? that’s true, isn’t it?’
‘Yes,’ Kitty answered, a pensive smile in her eyes.
‘But I really don’t know,’ the mother put in in defense
of her motherly care of her daughter, ‘what there was in
Anna Karenina
1206 of 1759
your past that could worry him? That Vronsky paid you
attentions—that happens to every girl.’
‘Oh, yes, but we didn’t mean that,’ Kitty said, flushing
a little.
‘No, let me speak,’ her mother went on, ‘why, you
yourself would not let me have a talk to Vronsky. Don’t
you remember?’
‘Oh, mamma!’ said Kitty, with an expression of
suffering.
‘There’s no keeping you young people in check
nowadays.... Your friendship could not have gone beyond
what was suitable. I should myself have called upon him to
explain himself. But, my darling, it’s not right for you to
be agitated. Please remember that, and calm yourself.’
‘I’m perfectly calm, maman.’
‘How happy it was for Kitty that Anna came then,’ said
Dolly, ‘and how unhappy for her. It turned out quite the
opposite,’ she said, struck by her own ideas. ‘Then Anna
was so happy, and Kitty thought herself unhappy. Now it
is just the opposite. I often think of her.’
‘A nice person to think about! Horrid, repulsive
woman—no heart,’ said her mother, who could not forget
that Kitty had married not Vronsky, but Levin.
Anna Karenina
1207 of 1759
‘What do you want to talk of it for?’ Kitty said with
annoyance. ‘I never think about it, and I don’t want to
think of it.... And I don’t want to think of it,’ she said,
catching the sound of her husband’s well-known step on
the steps of the terrace.
‘What’s that you don’t want to think about?’ inquired
Levin, coming onto the terrace.
But no one answered him, and he did not repeat the
question.
‘I’m sorry I’ve broken in on your feminine parliament,’
he said, looking round on every one discontentedly, and
perceiving that they had been talking of something which
they would not talk about before him.
For a second he felt that he was sharing the feeling of
Agafea Mihalovna, vexation at their making jam without
water, and altogether at the outside Shtcherbatsky
element. He smiled, however, and went up to Kitty.
‘Well, how are you?’ he asked her, looking at her with
the expression with which everyone looked at her now.
‘Oh, very well,’ said Kitty, smiling, ‘and how have
things gone with you?’
‘The wagons held three times as much as the old carts
did. Well, are we going for the children? I’ve ordered the
horses to be put in.’
Anna Karenina
1208 of 1759
‘What! you want to take Kitty in the wagonette?’ her
mother said reproachfully.
‘Yes, at a walking pace, princess.’
Levin never called the princess ‘maman’ as men often
do call their mothers-in-law, and the princess disliked his
not doing so. But though he liked and respected the
princess, Levin could not call her so without a sense of
profaning his feeling for his dead mother.
‘Come with us, maman,’ said Kitty.
‘I don’t like to see such imprudence.’
‘Well, I’ll walk then, I’m so well.’ Kitty got up and
went to her husband and took his hand.
‘You may be well, but everything in moderation,’ said
the princess.
‘Well, Agafea Mihalovna, is the jam done?’ said Levin,
smiling to Agafea Mihalovna, and trying to cheer her up.
‘Is it all right in the new way?’
‘I suppose it’s all right. For our notions it’s boiled too
long.’
‘It’ll be all the better, Agafea Mihalovna, it won’t
mildew, even though our ice has begun to thaw already,
so that we’ve no cool cellar to store it,’ said Kitty, at once
divining her husband’s motive, and addressing the old
housekeeper with the same feeling; ‘but your pickle’s so
Anna Karenina
1209 of 1759
good, that mamma says she never tasted any like it,’ she
added, smiling, and putting her kerchief straight.
Agafea Mihalovna looked angrily at Kitty.
‘You needn’t try to console me, mistress. I need only
to look at you with him, and I feel happy,’ she said, and
something in the rough familiarity of that with him
touched Kitty
‘Come along with us to look for mushrooms, you will
show us the nest places.’ Agafea Mihalovna smiled and
shook her head, as though to say: ‘I should like to be
angry with you too, but I can’t.’
‘Do it, please, by my receipt,’ said the princess; ‘put
some paper over the jam, and moisten it with a little rum,
and without even ice, it will never go mildewy.’
Chapter 3
Kitty was particularly glad of a chance of being alone
with her husband, for she had noticed the shade of
mortification that had passed over his face—always so
quick to reflect every feeling—at the moment when he
had come onto the terrace and asked what they were
talking of, and had got no answer.
When they had set off on foot ahead of the others, and
had come out of sight of the house onto the beaten dusty
road, marked with rusty wheels and sprinkled with grains
of corn, she clung faster to his arm and pressed it closer to
her. He had quite forgotten the momentary unpleasant
impression, and alone with her he felt, now that the
thought of her approaching motherhood was never for a
moment absent from his mind, a new and delicious bliss,
quite pure from all alloy of sense, in the being near to the
woman he loved. There was no need of speech, yet he
longed to hear the sound of her voice, which like her eyes
had changed since she had been with child. In her voice,
as in her eyes, there was that softness and gravity which is
found in people continually concentrated on some
cherished pursuit.
Anna Karenina
1211 of 1759
‘So you’re not tired? Lean more on me,’ said he.
‘No, I’m so glad of a chance of being alone with you,
and I must own, though I’m happy with them, I do regret
our winter evenings alone.’
‘That was good, but this is even better. Both are
better,’ he said, squeezing her hand.
‘Do you know what we were talking about when you
came in?’
‘About jam?’
‘Oh, yes, about jam too; but afterwards, about how
men make offers.’
‘Ah!’ said Levin, listening more to the sound of her
voice than to the words she was saying, and all the while
paying attention to the road, which passed now through
the forest, and avoiding places where she might make a
false step.
‘And about Sergey Ivanovitch and Varenka. You’ve
noticed?... I’m very anxious for it,’ she went on. ‘What do
you think about it?’ And she peeped into his face.
‘I don’t know what to think,’ Levin answered, smiling.
‘Sergey seems very strange to me in that way. I told you,
you know..’
‘Yes, that he was in love with that girl who died...’
Anna Karenina
1212 of 1759
‘That was when I was a child; I know about it from
hearsay and tradition. I remember him then. He was
wonderfully sweet. But I’ve watched him since with
women; he is friendly, some of them he likes, but one
feels that to him they’re simply people, not women.’
‘Yes, but now with Varenka...I fancy there’s
something..’
‘Perhaps there is.... But one has to know him.... He’s a
peculiar, wonderful person. He lives a spiritual life only.
He’s too pure, too exalted a nature.’
‘Why? Would this lower him, then?’
‘No, but he’s so used to a spiritual life that he can’t
reconcile himself with actual fact, and Varenka is after all
fact.’
Levin had grown used by now to uttering his thought
boldly, without taking the trouble of clothing it in exact
language. He knew that his wife, in such moments of
loving tenderness as now, would understand what he
meant to say from a hint, and she did understand him.
‘Yes, but there’s not so much of that actual fact about
her as about me. I can see that he would never have cared
for me. She is altogether spiritual.’
‘Oh, no, he is so fond of you, and I am always so glad
when my people like you...’
Anna Karenina
1213 of 1759
‘Yes, he’s very nice to me; but..’
‘It’s not as it was with poor Nikolay...you really cared
for each other,’ Levin finished. ‘Why not speak of him?’
he added. ‘I sometimes blame myself for not; it ends in
one’s forgetting. Ah, how terrible and dear he was!... Yes,
what were we talking about?’ Levin said, after a pause.
‘You think he can’t fall in love,’ said Kitty, translating
into her own language.
‘It’s not so much that he can’t fall in love,’ Levin said,
smiling, ‘but he has not the weakness necessary.... I’ve
always envied him, and even now, when I’m so happy, I
still envy him.’
‘You envy him for not being able to fall in love?’
‘I envy him for being better than I,’ said Levin. ‘He
does not live for himself. His whole life is subordinated to
his duty. And that’s why he can be calm and contented.’
‘And you?’ Kitty asked, with an ironical and loving
smile.
She could never have explained the chain of thought
that made her smile; but the last link in it was that her
husband, in exalting his brother and abasing himself, was
not quite sincere. Kitty knew that this insincerity came
from his love for his brother, from his sense of shame at
Anna Karenina
1214 of 1759
being too happy, and above all from his unflagging craving
to be better—she loved it in him, and so she smiled.
‘And you? What are you dissatisfied with?’ she asked,
with the same smile.
Her disbelief in his self-dissatisfaction delighted him,
and unconsciously he tried to draw her into giving
utterance to the grounds of her disbelief.
‘I am happy, but dissatisfied with myself...’ he said.
‘Why, how can you be dissatisfied with yourself if you
are happy?’
‘Well, how shall I say?... In my heart I really care for
nothing whatever but that you should not stumble—see?
Oh, but really you mustn’t skip about like that!’ he cried,
breaking off to scold her for too agile a movement in
stepping over a branch that lay in the path. ‘But when I
think about myself, and compare myself with others,
especially with my brother, I feel I’m a poor creature.’
‘But in what way?’ Kitty pursued with the same smile.
‘Don’t you too work for others? What about your cooperative settlement, and your work on the estate, and
your book?..’
‘Oh, but I feel, and particularly just now—it’s your
fault,’ he said, pressing her hand—‘that all that doesn’t
count. I do it in a way halfheartedly. If I could care for all
Anna Karenina
1215 of 1759
that as I care for you!... Instead of that, I do it in these days
like a task that is set me.’
‘Well, what would you say about papa?’ asked Kitty. ‘Is
he a poor creature then, as he does nothing for the public
good?’
‘He?—no! But then one must have the simplicity, the
straightforwardness, the goodness of your father: and I
haven’t got that. I do nothing, and I fret about it. It’s all
your doing. Before there was you—and THIS too,’ he
added with a glance towards her waist that she
understood— ‘I put all my energies into work; now I
can’t, and I’m ashamed; I do it just as though it were a task
set me, I’m pretending...’
‘Well, but would you like to change this minute with
Sergey Ivanovitch?’ said Kitty. ‘Would you like to do this
work for the general good, and to love the task set you, as
he does, and nothing else?’
‘Of course not,’ said Levin. ‘But I’m so happy that I
don’t understand anything. So you think he’ll make her an
offer today?’ he added after a brief silence.
‘I think so, and I don’t think so. Only, I’m awfully
anxious for it. Here, wait a minute.’ she stooped down
and picked a wild camomile at the edge of the path.
Anna Karenina
1216 of 1759
‘Come, count: he does propose, he doesn’t,’ she said,
giving him the flower.
‘He does, he doesn’t,’ said Levin, tearing off the white
petals.
‘No, no!’ Kitty, snatching at his hand, stopped him.
She had been watching his fingers with interest. ‘You
picked off two.’
‘Oh, but see, this little one shan’t count to make up,’
said Levin, tearing off a little half-grown petal. ‘Here’s the
wagonette overtaking us.’
‘Aren’t you tired, Kitty?’ called the princess.
‘Not in the least.’
‘If you are you can get in, as the horses are quiet and
walking.’
But it was not worth while to get in, they were quite
near the place, and all walked on together.
Chapter 4
Varenka, with her white kerchief on her black hair,
surrounded by the children, gaily and good-humoredly
looking after them, and at the same time visibly excited at
the possibility of receiving a declaration from the man she
cared for, was very attractive. Sergey Ivanovitch walked
beside her, and never left off admiring her. Looking at her,
he recalled all the delightful things he had heard from her
lips, all the good he knew about her, and became more
and more conscious that the feeling he had for her was
something special that he had felt long, long ago, and only
once, in his early youth. The feeling of happiness in being
near her continually grew, and at last reached such a point
that, as he put a huge, slender-stalked agaric fungus in her
basket, he looked straight into her face, and noticing the
flush of glad and alarmed excitement that overspread her
face, he was confused himself, and smiled to her in silence
a smile that said too much.
‘If so,’ he said to himself, ‘I ought to think it over and
make up my mind, and not give way like a boy to the
impulse of a moment.’
Anna Karenina
1218 of 1759
‘I’m going to pick by myself apart from all the rest, or
else my efforts will make no show,’ he said, and he left the
edge of the forest where they were walking on low silky
grass between old birch trees standing far apart, and went
more into the heart of the wood, where between the
white birch trunks there were gray trunks of aspen and
dark bushes of hazel. Walking some forty paces away,
Sergey Ivanovitch, knowing he was out of sight, stood still
behind a bushy spindle-tree in full flower with its rosy red
catkins. It was perfectly still all round him. Only overhead
in the birches under which he stood, the flies, like a
swarm of bees, buzzed unceasingly, and from time to time
the children’s voices were floated across to him. All at
once he heard, not far from the edge of the wood, the
sound of Varenka’s contralto voice, calling Grisha, and a
smile of delight passed over Sergey Ivanovitch’s face.
Conscious of this smile, he shook his head disapprovingly
at his own condition, and taking out a cigar, he began
lighting it. For a long while he could not get a match to
light against the trunk of a birch tree. The soft scales of the
white bark rubbed off the phosphorus, and the light went
out. At last one of the matches burned, and the fragrant
cigar smoke, hovering uncertainly in flat, wide coils,
stretched away forwards and upwards over a bush under
Anna Karenina
1219 of 1759
the overhanging branches of a birch tree. Watching the
streak of smoke, Sergey Ivanovitch walked gently on,
deliberating on his position.
‘Why not?’ he thought. ‘If it were only a passing fancy
or a passion, if it were only this attraction—this mutual
attraction (I can call it a MUTUAL attraction), but if I felt
that it was in contradiction with the whole bent of my
life—if I felt that in giving way to this attraction I should
be false to my vocation and my duty...but it’s not so. The
only thing I can say against it is that, when I lost Marie, I
said to myself that I would remain faithful to her memory.
That’s the only thing I can say against my feeling.... That’s
a great thing,’ Sergey Ivanovitch said to himself, feeling at
the same time that this consideration had not the slightest
importance for him personally, but would only perhaps
detract from his romantic character in the eyes of others.
‘But apart from that, however much I searched, I should
never find anything to say against my feeling. If I were
choosing by considerations of suitability alone, I could not
have found anything better.’
However many women and girls he thought of whom
he knew, he could not think of a girl who united to such
a degree all, positively all, the qualities he would wish to
see in his wife. She had all the charm and freshness of
Anna Karenina
1220 of 1759
youth, but she was not a child; and if she loved him, she
loved him consciously as a woman ought to love; that was
one thing. Another point: she was not only far from being
worldly, but had an unmistakable distaste for worldly
society, and at the same time she knew the world, and had
all the ways of a woman of the best society, which were
absolutely essential to Sergey Ivanovitch’s conception of
the woman who was to share his life. Thirdly: she was
religious, and not like a child, unconsciously religious and
good, as Kitty, for example, was, but her life was founded
on religious principles. Even in trifling matters, Sergey
Ivanovitch found in her all that he wanted in his wife: she
was poor and alone in the world, so she would not bring
with her a mass of relations and their influence into her
husband’s house, as he saw now in Kitty’s case. She would
owe everything to her husband, which was what he had
always desired too for his future family life. And this girl,
who united all these qualities, loved him. He was a modest
man, but he could not help seeing it. And he loved her.
There was one consideration against it—his age. But he
came of a long-lived family, he had not a single gray hair,
no one would have taken him for forty, and he
remembered Varenka’s saying that it was only in Russia
that men of fifty thought themselves old, and that in
Anna Karenina
1221 of 1759
France a man of fifty considers himself dans la force de
l’age, while a man of forty is un jeune homme. But what
did the mere reckoning of years matter when he felt as
young in heart as he had been twenty years ago? Was it
not youth to feel as he felt now, when coming from the
other side to the edge of the wood he saw in the glowing
light of the slanting sunbeams the gracious figure of
Varenka in her yellow gown with her basket, walking
lightly by the trunk of an old birch tree, and when this
impression of the sight of Varenka blended so
harmoniously with the beauty of the view, of the yellow
oatfield lying bathed in the slanting sunshine, and beyond
it the distant ancient forest flecked with yellow and
melting into the blue of the distance? His heart throbbed
joyously. A softened feeling came over him. He felt that
he had made up his mind. Varenka, who had just
crouched down to pick a mushroom, rose with a supple
movement and looked round. Flinging away the cigar,
Sergey Ivanovitch advanced with resolute steps towards
her.
Anna Karenina
1222 of 1759
Chapter 5
‘Varvara Andreevna, when I was very young, I set
before myself the ideal of the women I loved and should
be happy to call my wife. I have lived through a long life,
and now for the first time I have met what I sought—in
you. I love you, and offer you my hand.’
Sergey Ivanovitch was saying this to himself while he
was ten paces from Varvara. Kneeling down, with her
hands over the mushrooms to guard them from Grisha,
she was calling little Masha.
‘Come here, little ones! There are so many!’ she was
saying in her sweet, deep voice.
Seeing Sergey Ivanovitch approaching, she did not get
up and did not change her position, but everything told
him that she felt his presence and was glad of it.
‘Well, did you find some?’ she asked from under the
white kerchief, turning her handsome, gently smiling face
to him.
‘Not one,’ said Sergey Ivanovitch. ‘Did you?’
She did not answer, busy with the children who
thronged about her.
Anna Karenina
1223 of 1759
‘That one too, near the twig,’ she pointed out to little
Masha a little fungus, split in half across its rosy cap by the
dry grass from under which it thrust itself. Varenka got up
while Masha picked the fungus, breaking it into two white
halves. ‘This brings back my childhood,’ she added,
moving apart from the children beside Sergey Ivanovitch.
They walked on for some steps in silence. Varenka saw
that he wanted to speak; she guessed of what, and felt faint
with joy and panic. They had walked so far away that no
one could hear them now, but still he did not begin to
speak. It would have been better for Varenka to be silent.
After a silence it would have been easier for them to say
what they wanted to say than after talking about
mushrooms. But against her own will, as it were
accidentally, Varenka said:
‘So you found nothing? In the middle of the wood
there are always fewer, though.’ Sergey Ivanovitch sighed
and made no answer. He was annoyed that she had spoken
about the mushrooms. He wanted to bring her back to the
first words she had uttered about her childhood; but after a
pause of some length, as though against his own will, he
made an observation in response to her last words.
Anna Karenina
1224 of 1759
‘I have heard that the white edible funguses are found
principally at the edge of the wood, though I can’t tell
them apart.’
Some minutes more passed, they moved still further
away from the children, and were quite alone. Varenka’s
heart throbbed so that she heard it beating, and felt that
she was turning red and pale and red again.
To be the wife of a man like Koznishev, after her
position with Madame Stahl, was to her imagination the
height of happiness. Besides, she was almost certain that
she was in love with him. And this moment it would have
to be decided. She felt frightened. She dreaded both his
speaking and his not speaking.
Now or never it must be said—that Sergey Ivanovitch
felt too. Everything in the expression, the flushed cheeks
and the downcast eyes of Varenka betrayed a painful
suspense. Sergey Ivanovitch saw it and felt sorry for her.
He felt even that to say nothing now would be a slight to
her. Rapidly in his own mind he ran over all the
arguments in support of his decision. He even said over to
himself the words in which he meant to put his offer, but
instead of those words, some utterly unexpected reflection
that occurred to him made him ask:
Anna Karenina
1225 of 1759
‘What is the difference between the ‘birch’ mushroom
and the ‘white’ mushroom?’
Varenka’s lips quivered with emotion as she answered:
‘In the top part there is scarcely any difference, it’s in
the stalk.’
And as soon as these words were uttered, both he and
she felt that it was over, that what was to have been said
would not be said; and their emotion, which had up to
then been continually growing more intense, began to
subside.
‘The birch mushroom’s stalk suggests a dark man’s chin
after two days without shaving,’ said Sergey Ivanovitch,
speaking quite calmly now.
‘Yes, that’s true,’ answered Varenka smiling, and
unconsciously the direction of their walk changed. They
began to turn towards the children. Varenka felt both sore
and ashamed; at the same time she had a sense of relief.
When he had got home again and went over the whole
subject, Sergey Ivanovitch thought his previous decision
had been a mistaken one. He could not be false to the
memory of Marie.
‘Gently, children, gently!’ Levin shouted quite angrily
to the children, standing before his wife to protect her
Anna Karenina
1226 of 1759
when the crowd of children flew with shrieks of delight to
meet them.
Behind the children Sergey Ivanovitch and Varenka
walked out of the wood. Kitty had no need to ask
Varenka; she saw from the calm and somewhat crestfallen
faces of both that her plans had not come off.
‘Well?’ her husband questioned her as they were going
home again.
‘It doesn’t bite,’ said Kitty, her smile and manner of
speaking recalling her father, a likeness Levin often noticed
with pleasure.
‘How doesn’t bite?’
‘I’ll show you,’ she said, taking her husband’s hand,
lifting it to her mouth, and just faintly brushing it with
closed lips. ‘Like a kiss on a priest’s hand.’
‘Which didn’t it bite with?’ he said, laughing.
‘Both. But it should have been like this..’
‘There are some peasants coming..’
‘Oh, they didn’t see.’
Anna Karenina
1227 of 1759
Chapter 6
During the time of the children’s tea the grown-up
people sat in the balcony and talked as though nothing had
happened, though they all, especially Sergey Ivanovitch
and Varenka, were very well aware that there had
happened an event which, though negative, was of very
great importance. They both had the same feeling, rather
like that of a schoolboy after an examination, which has
left him in the same class or shut him out of the school
forever. Everyone present, feeling too that something had
happened, talked eagerly about extraneous subjects. Levin
and Kitty were particularly happy and conscious of their
love that evening. And their happiness in their love
seemed to imply a disagreeable slur on those who would
have liked to feel the same and could not—and they felt a
prick of conscience.
‘Mark my words, Alexander will not come,’ said the
old princess.
That evening they were expecting Stepan Arkadyevitch
to come down by train, and the old prince had written
that possibly he might come too.
Anna Karenina
1228 of 1759
‘And I know why,’ the princess went on; ‘he says that
young people ought to be left alone for a while at first.’
‘But papa has left us alone. We’ve never seen him,’ said
Kitty. ‘Besides, we’re not young people!—we’re old,
married people by now.’
‘Only if he doesn’t come, I shall say good-bye to you
children,’ said the princess, sighing mournfully.
‘What nonsense, mamma!’ both the daughters fell upon
her at once.
‘How do you suppose he is feeling? Why, now..’
And suddenly there was an unexpected quiver in the
princess’s voice. Her daughters were silent, and looked at
one another. ‘Maman always finds something to be
miserable about,’ they said in that glance. They did not
know that happy as the princess was in her daughter’s
house, and useful as she felt herself to be there, she had
been extremely miserable, both on her own account and
her husband’s, ever since they had married their last and
favorite daughter, and the old home had been left empty.
‘What is it, Agafea Mihalovna?’ Kitty asked suddenly of
Agafea Mihalovna, who was standing with a mysterious
air, and a face full of meaning.
‘About supper.’
Anna Karenina
1229 of 1759
‘Well, that’s right,’ said Dolly; ‘you go and arrange
about it, and I’ll go and hear Grisha repeat his lesson, or
else he will have nothing done all day.’
‘That’s my lesson! No, Dolly, I’m going,’ said Levin,
jumping up.
Grisha, who was by now at a high school, had to go
over the lessons of the term in the summer holidays. Darya
Alexandrovna, who had been studying Latin with her son
in Moscow before, had made it a rule on coming to the
Levins’ to go over with him, at least once a day, the most
difficult lessons of Latin and arithmetic. Levin had offered
to take her place, but the mother, having once overheard
Levin’s lesson, and noticing that it was not given exactly as
the teacher in Moscow had given it, said resolutely,
though with much embarrassment and anxiety not to
mortify Levin, that they must keep strictly to the book as
the teacher had done, and that she had better undertake it
again herself. Levin was amazed both at Stepan
Arkadyevitch, who, by neglecting his duty, threw upon
the mother the supervision of studies of which she had no
comprehension, and at the teachers for teaching the
children so badly. But he promised his sister-in-law to
give the lessons exactly as she wished. And he went on
teaching Grisha, not in his own way, but by the book, and
Anna Karenina
1230 of 1759
so took little interest in it, and often forgot the hour of the
lesson. So it had been today.
‘No, I’m going, Dolly, you sit still,’ he said. ‘We’ll do it
all properly, like the book. Only when Stiva comes, and
we go out shooting, then we shall have to miss it.’
And Levin went to Grisha.
Varenka was saying the same thing to Kitty. Even in
the happy, well-ordered household of the Levins Varenka
had succeeded in making herself useful.
‘I’ll see to the supper, you sit still,’ she said, and got up
to go to Agafea Mihalovna.
‘Yes, yes, most likely they’ve not been able to get
chickens. If so, ours..’
‘Agafea Mihalovna and I will see about it,’ and Varenka
vanished with her.
‘What a nice girl!’ said the princess.
‘Not nice, maman; she’s an exquisite girl; there’s no
one else like her.’
‘So you are expecting Stepan Arkadyevitch today?’ said
Sergey Ivanovitch, evidently not disposed to pursue the
conversation about Varenka. ‘It would be difficult to find
two sons-in-law more unlike than yours,’ he said with a
subtle smile. ‘One all movement, only living in society,
like a fish in water; the other our Kostya, lively, alert,
Anna Karenina
1231 of 1759
quick in everything, but as soon as he is in society, he
either sinks into apathy, or struggles helplessly like a fish
on land.’
‘Yes, he’s very heedless,’ said the princess, addressing
Sergey Ivanovitch. ‘I’ve been meaning, indeed, to ask you
to tell him that it’s out of the question for her’ (she
indicated Kitty) ‘to stay here; that she positively must
come to Moscow. He talks of getting a doctor down..’
‘Maman, he’ll do everything; he has agreed to
everything,’ Kitty said, angry with her mother for
appealing to Sergey Ivanovitch to judge in such a matter.
In the middle of their conversation they heard the
snorting of horses and the sound of wheels on the gravel.
Dolly had not time to get up to go and meet her husband,
when from the window of the room below, where Grisha
was having his lesson, Levin leaped out and helped Grisha
out after him.
‘It’s Stiva!’ Levin shouted from under the balcony.
‘We’ve finished, Dolly, don’t be afraid!’ he added, and
started running like a boy to meet the carriage.
‘Is ea id, ejus, ejus, ejus!’ shouted Grisha, skipping along
the avenue.
Anna Karenina
1232 of 1759
‘And some one else too! Papa, of course!’ cried Levin,
stopping at the entrance of the avenue. ‘Kitty, don’t come
down the steep staircase, go round.’
But Levin had been mistaken in taking the person
sitting in the carriage for the old prince. As he got nearer
to the carriage he saw beside Stepan Arkadyevitch not the
prince but a handsome, stout young man in a Scotch cap,
with long ends of ribbon behind. This was Vassenka
Veslovsky, a distant cousin of the Shtcherbatskys, a
brilliant young gentleman in Petersburg and Moscow
society. ‘A capital fellow, and a keen sportsman,’ as Stepan
Arkadyevitch said, introducing him.
Not a whit abashed by the disappointment caused by
his having come in place of the old prince, Veslovsky
greeted Levin gaily, claiming acquaintance with him in the
past, and snatching up Grisha into the carriage, lifted him
over the pointer that Stepan Arkadyevitch had brought
with him.
Levin did not get into the carriage, but walked behind.
He was rather vexed at the non-arrival of the old prince,
whom he liked more and more the more he saw of him,
and also at the arrival of this Vassenka Veslovsky, a quite
uncongenial and superfluous person. He seemed to him
still more uncongenial and superfluous when, on
Anna Karenina
1233 of 1759
approaching the steps where the whole party, children and
grown-up, were gathered together in much excitement,
Levin saw Vassenka Veslovsky, with a particularly warm
and gallant air, kissing Kitty’s hand.
‘Your wife arid I are cousins and very old friends,’ said
Vassenka Veslovsky, once more shaking Levin’s hand with
great warmth.
‘Well, are there plenty of birds?’ Stepan Arkadyevitch
said to Levin, hardly leaving time for everyone to utter
their greetings. ‘We’ve come with the most savage
intentions. Why, maman, they’ve not been in Moscow
since! Look, Tanya, here’s something for you! Get it,
please, it’s in the carriage, behind!’ he talked in all
directions. ‘How pretty you’ve grown, Dolly,’ he said to
his wife, once more kissing her hand, holding it in one of
his, and patting it with the other.
Levin, who a minute before had been in the happiest
frame of mind, now looked darkly at everyone, and
everything displeased him.
‘Who was it he kissed yesterday with those lips?’ he
thought, looking at Stepan Arkadyevitch’s tender
demonstrations to his wife. He looked at Dolly, and he did
not like her either.
Anna Karenina
1234 of 1759
‘She doesn’t believe in his love. So what is she so
pleased about? Revolting!’ thought Levin.
He looked at the princess, who had been so dear to
him a minute before, and he did not like the manner in
which she welcomed this Vassenka, with his ribbons, just
as though she were in her own house.
Even Sergey Ivanovitch, who had come out too onto
the steps, seemed to him unpleasant with the show of
cordiality with which he met Stepan Arkadyevitch,
though Levin knew that his brother neither liked nor
respected Oblonsky.
And Varenka, even she seemed hateful, with her air
sainte nitouche making the acquaintance of this
gentleman, while all the while she was thinking of nothing
but getting married.
And more hateful than anyone was Kitty for falling in
with the tone of gaiety with which this gentleman
regarded his visit in the country, as though it were a
holiday for himself and everyone else. And, above all,
unpleasant was that particular smile with which she
responded to his smile.
Noisily talking, they all went into the house; but as
soon as they were all seated, Levin turned and went out.
Anna Karenina
1235 of 1759
Kitty saw something was wrong with her husband. She
tried to seize a moment to speak to him alone, but he
made haste to get away from her, saying he was wanted at
the counting-house. It was long since his own work on
the estate had seemed to him so important as at that
moment. ‘It’s all holiday for them,’ he thought; ‘but these
are no holiday matters, they won’t wait, and there’s no
living without them.’
Anna Karenina
1236 of 1759
Chapter 7
Levin came back to the house only when they sent to
summon him to supper. On the stairs were standing Kitty
and Agafea Mihalovna, consulting about wines for supper.
‘But why are you making all this fuss? Have what we
usually do.’
‘No, Stiva doesn’t drink...Kostya, stop, what’s the
matter?’ Kitty began, hurrying after him, but he strode
ruthlessly away to the dining room without waiting for
her, and at once joined in the lively general conversation
which was being maintained there by Vassenka Veslovsky
and Stepan Arkadyevitch.
‘Well, what do you say, are we going shooting
tomorrow?’ said Stepan Arkadyevitch.
‘Please, do let’s go,’ said Veslovsky, moving to another
chair, where he sat down sideways, with one fat leg
crossed under him.
‘I shall be delighted, we will go. And have you had any
shooting yet this year?’ said Levin to Veslovsky, looking
intently at his leg, but speaking with that forced amiability
that Kitty knew so well in him, and that was so out of
keeping with him. ‘I can’t answer for our finding grouse,
Anna Karenina
1237 of 1759
but there are plenty of snipe. Only we ought to start early.
You’re not tired? Aren’t you tired, Stiva?’
‘Me tired? I’ve never been tired yet. Suppose we stay
up all night. Let’s go for a walk!’
‘Yes, really, let’s not go to bed at all! Capital!’
Veslovsky chimed in.
‘Oh, we all know you can do without sleep, and keep
other people up too,’ Dolly said to her husband, with that
faint note of irony in her voice which she almost always
had now with her husband. ‘But to my thinking, it’s time
for bed now.... I’m going, I don’t want supper.’
‘No, do stay a little, Dolly,’ said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
going round to her side behind the table where they were
having supper. ‘I’ve so much still to tell you.’
‘Nothing really, I suppose.’
‘Do you know Veslovsky has been at Anna’s, and he’s
going to them again? You know they’re hardly fifty miles
from you, and I too must certainly go over there.
Veslovsky, come here!’
Vassenka crossed over to the ladies, and sat down
beside Kitty.
‘Ah, do tell me, please; you have stayed with her? How
was she?’ Darya Alexandrovna appealed to him.
Anna Karenina
1238 of 1759
Levin was left at the other end of the table, and though
never pausing in his conversation with the princess and
Varenka, he saw that there was an eager and mysterious
conversation going on between Stepan Arkadyevitch,
Dolly, Kitty, and Veslovsky. And that was not all. He saw
on his wife’s face an expression of real feeling as she gazed
with fixed eyes on the handsome face of Vassenka, who
was telling them something with great animation.
‘It’s exceedingly nice at their place,’ Veslovsky was
telling them about Vronsky and Anna. ‘I can’t, of course,
take it upon myself to judge, but in their house you feel
the real feeling of home.’
‘What do they intend doing?’
‘I believe they think of going to Moscow.’
‘How jolly it would be for us all to go over to them
together’ When are you going there?’ Stepan
Arkadyevitch asked Vassenka.
‘I’m spending July there.’
‘Will you go?’ Stepan Arkadyevitch said to his wife.
‘I’ve been wanting to a long while; I shall certainly go,’
said Dolly. ‘I am sorry for her, and I know her. She’s a
splendid woman. I will go alone, when you go back, and
then I shall be in no one’s way. And it will be better
indeed without you.’
Anna Karenina
1239 of 1759
‘To be sure,’ said Stepan Arkadyevitch. ‘And you,
Kitty?’
‘I? Why should I go?’ Kitty said, flushing all over, and
she glanced round at her husband.
‘Do you know Anna Arkadyevna, then?’ Veslovsky
asked her. ‘She’s a very fascinating woman.’
‘Yes,’ she answered Veslovsky, crimsoning still more.
She got up and walked across to her husband.
‘Are you going shooting, then, tomorrow?’ she said.
His jealousy had in these few moments, especially at the
flush that had overspread her cheeks while she was talking
to Veslovsky, gone far indeed. Now as he heard her
words, he construed them in his own fashion. Strange as it
was to him afterwards to recall it, it seemed to him at the
moment clear that in asking whether he was going
shooting, all she cared to know was whether he would
give that pleasure to Vassenka Veslovsky, with whom, as
he fancied, she was in love.
‘Yes, I’m going,’ he answered her in an unnatural
voice, disagreeable to himself.
‘No, better spend the day here tomorrow, or Dolly
won’t see anything of her husband, and set off the day
after,’ said Kitty.
Anna Karenina
1240 of 1759
The motive of Kitty’s words was interpreted by Levin
thus: ‘Don’t separate me from HIM. I don’t care about
YOUR going, but do let me enjoy the society of this
delightful young man.’
‘Oh, if you wish, we’ll stay here tomorrow,’ Levin
answered, with peculiar amiability.
Vassenka meanwhile, utterly unsuspecting the misery
his presence had occasioned, got up from the table after
Kitty, and watching her with smiling and admiring eyes,
he followed her.
Levin saw that look. He turned white, and for a minute
he could hardly breathe. ‘How dare he look at my wife
like that!’ was the feeling that boiled within him.
‘Tomorrow, then? Do, please, let us go,’ said Vassenka,
sitting down on a chair, and again crossing his leg as his
habit was.
Levin’s jealousy went further still. Already he saw
himself a deceived husband, looked upon by his wife and
her lover as simply necessary to provide them with the
conveniences and pleasures of life.... But in spite of that he
made polite and hospitable inquiries of Vassenka about his
shooting, his gun, and his boots, and agreed to go shooting
next day.
Anna Karenina
1241 of 1759
Happily for Levin, the old princess cut short his agonies
by getting up herself and advising Kitty to go to bed. But
even at this point Levin could not escape another agony.
As he said good-night to his hostess, Vassenka would again
have kissed her hand, but Kitty, reddening, drew back her
hand and said with a naive bluntness, for which the old
princess scolded her afterwards:
‘We don’t like that fashion.’
In Levin’s eyes she was to blame for having allowed
such relations to arise, and still more to blame for showing
so awkwardly that she did not like them.
‘Why, how can one want to go to bed!’ said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, who, after drinking several glasses of wine
at supper, was now in his most charming and sentimental
humor. ‘Look, Kitty,’ he said, pointing to the moon,
which had just risen behind the lime trees"how exquisite!
Veslovsky, this is the time for a serenade. You know, he
has a splendid voice; we practiced songs together along the
road. He has brought some lovely songs with him, two
new ones. Varvara Andreevna and he must sing some
duets.’
When the party had broken up, Stepan Arkadyevitch
walked a long while about the avenue with Veslovsky;
their voices could be heard singing one of the new songs.
Anna Karenina
1242 of 1759
Levin hearing these voices sat scowling in an easy-chair
in his wife’s bedroom, and maintained an obstinate silence
when she asked him what was wrong. But when at last
with a timid glance she hazarded the question: ‘Was there
perhaps something you disliked about Veslovsky?’—it all
burst out, and he told her all. He was humiliated himself at
what he was saying, and that exasperated him all the more.
He stood facing her with his eyes glittering menacingly
under his scowling brows, and he squeezed his strong arms
across his chest, as though he were straining every nerve to
hold himself in. The expression of his face would have
been grim, and even cruel, if it had not at the same time
had a look of suffering which touched her. His jaws were
twitching, and his voice kept breaking.
‘You must understand that I’m not jealous, that’s a
nasty word. I can’t be jealous, and believe that.... I can’t
say what I feel, but this is awful.... I’m not jealous, but I’m
wounded, humiliated that anybody dare think, that
anybody dare look at you with eyes like that.’
‘Eyes like what?’ said Kitty, trying as conscientiously as
possible to recall every word and gesture of that evening
and every shade implied in them.
At the very bottom of her heart she did think there had
been something precisely at the moment when he had
Anna Karenina
1243 of 1759
crossed over after her to the other end of the table; but she
dared not own it even to herself, and would have been
even more unable to bring herself to say so to him, and so
increase his suffering.
‘And what can there possibly be attractive about me as I
am now?..’
‘Ah!’ he cried, clutching at his head, ‘you shouldn’t say
that!... If you had been attractive then..’
‘Oh, no, Kostya, oh, wait a minute, oh, do listen!’ she
said, looking at him with an expression of pained
commiseration. ‘Why, what can you be thinking about!
When for me there’s no one in the world, no one, no
one!... Would you like me never to see anyone?’
For the first minute she had been offended at his
jealousy; she was angry that the slightest amusement, even
the most innocent, should be forbidden her; but now she
would readily have sacrificed, not merely such trifles, but
everything, for his peace of mind, to save him from the
agony he was suffering.
‘You must understand the horror and comedy of my
position,’ he went on in a desperate whisper; ‘that he’s in
my house, that he’s done nothing improper positively
except his free and easy airs and the way he sits on his legs.
Anna Karenina
1244 of 1759
He thinks it’s the best possible form, and so I’m obliged to
be civil to him.’
‘But, Kostya, you’re exaggerating,’ said Kitty, at the
bottom of her heart rejoicing at the depth of his love for
her, shown now in his jealousy.
‘The most awful part of it all is that you’re just as you
always are, and especially now when to me you’re
something sacred, and we’re so happy, so particularly
happy—and all of a sudden a little wretch.... He’s not a
little wretch; why should I abuse him? I have nothing to
do with him. But why should my, and your, happiness..’
‘Do you know, I understand now what it’s all come
from,’ Kitty was beginning.
‘Well, what? what?’
‘I saw how you looked while we were talking at
supper.’
‘Well, well!’ Levin said in dismay.
She told him what they had been talking about. And as
she told him, she was breathless with emotion. Levin was
silent for a space, then he scanned her pale and distressed
face, and suddenly he clutched at his head.
‘Katya, I’ve been worrying you! Darling, forgive me!
It’s madness! Katya, I’m a criminal. And how could you be
so distressed at such idiocy?’
Anna Karenina
1245 of 1759
‘Oh, I was sorry for you.’
‘For me? for me? How mad I am!... But why make you
miserable? It’s awful to think that any outsider can shatter
our happiness.’
‘It’s humiliating too, of course.’
‘Oh, then I’ll keep him here all the summer, and will
overwhelm him with civility,’ said Levin, kissing her
hands. ‘You shall see. Tomorrow.... Oh, yes, we are going
tomorrow.’
Anna Karenina
1246 of 1759
Chapter 8
Next day, before the ladies were up, the wagonette and
a trap for the shooting party were at the door, and Laska,
aware since early morning that they were going shooting,
after much whining and darting to and fro, had sat herself
down in the wagonette beside the coachman, and,
disapproving of the delay, was excitedly watching the door
from which the sportsmen still did not come out. The first
to come out was Vassenka Veslovsky, in new high boots
that reached half-way up his thick thighs, in a green
blouse, with a new Russian leather cartridge-belt, and in
his Scotch cap with ribbons, with a brand-new English
gun without a sling. Laska flew up to him, welcomed him,
and jumping up, asked him in her own way whether the
others were coming soon, but getting no answer from
him, she returned to her post of observation and sank into
repose again, her head on one side, and one ear pricked up
to listen. At last the door opened with a creak, and Stepan
Arkadyevitch’s spot-and-tan pointer Krak flew out,
running round and round and turning over in the air.
Stepan Arkadyevitch himself followed with a gun in his
hand and a cigar in his mouth.
Anna Karenina
1247 of 1759
‘Good dog, good dog, Krak!’ he cried encouragingly to
the dog, who put his paws up on his chest, catching at his
game bag. Stepan Arkadyevitch was dressed in rough
leggings and spats, in torn trousers and a short coat. On his
head there was a wreck of a hat of indefinite form, but his
gun of a new patent was a perfect gem, and his game bag
and cartridge belt, though worn, were of the very best
quality.
Vassenka Veslovsky had had no notion before that it
was truly chic for a sportsman to be in tatters, but to have
his shooting outfit of the best quality. He saw it now as he
looked at Stepan Arkadyevitch, radiant in his rags,
graceful, well-fed, and joyous, a typical Russian nobleman.
And he made up his mind that next time he went shooting
he would certainly adopt the same get-up.
‘Well, and what about our host?’ he asked.
‘A young wife,’ said Stepan Arkadyevitch, smiling.
‘Yes, and such a charming one!’
‘He came down dressed. No doubt he’s run up to her
again.’
Stepan Arkadyevitch guessed right. Levin had run up
again to his wife to ask her once more If she forgave him
for his idiocy yesterday, and, moreover, to beg her for
Christ’s sake to be more careful. The great thing was for
Anna Karenina
1248 of 1759
her to keep away from the children—they might any
minute push against her. Then he had once more to hear
her declare that she was not angry with him for going
away for two days, and to beg her to be sure to send him a
note next morning by a servant on horseback, to write
him, if it were but two words only, to let him know that
all was well with her.
Kitty was distressed, as she always was, at parting for a
couple of days from her husband, but when she saw his
eager figure, looking big and strong in his shooting-boots
and his white blouse, and a sort of sportsman elation and
excitement incomprehensible to her, she forgot her own
chagrin for the sake of his pleasure, and said good-bye to
him cheerfully.
‘Pardon, gentlemen!’ he said, running out onto the
steps. ‘Have you put the lunch in? Why is the chestnut on
the right? Well, it doesn’t matter. Laska, down; go and lie
down!’
‘Put it with the herd of oxen,’ he said to the herdsman,
who was waiting for him at the steps with some question.
‘Excuse me, here comes another villain.’
Levin jumped out of the wagonette, in which he had
already taken his seat, to meet the carpenter, who came
towards the steps with a rule in his hand.
Anna Karenina
1249 of 1759
‘You didn’t come to the counting house yesterday, and
now you’re detaining me. Well, what is it?’
‘Would your honor let me make another turning? It’s
only three steps to add. And we make it just fit at the same
time. It will be much more convenient.’
‘You should have listened to me,’ Levin answered with
annoyance. ‘I said: Put the lines and then fit in the steps.
Now there’s no setting it right. Do as I told you, and
make a new staircase.’
The point was that in the lodge that was being built the
carpenter had spoiled the staircase, fitting it together
without calculating the space it was to fill, so that the steps
were all sloping when it was put in place. Now the
carpenter wanted, keeping the same staircase, to add three
steps.
‘It will be much better.’
‘But where’s your staircase coming out with its three
steps?’
‘Why, upon my word, sir,’ the carpenter said with a
contemptuous smile. ‘It comes out right at the very spot.
It starts, so to speak,’ he said, with a persuasive gesture; ‘it
comes down, and comes down, and comes out.’
‘But three steps will add to the length too...where is it
to come out?’
Anna Karenina
1250 of 1759
‘Why, to be sure, it’ll start from the bottom and go up
and go up, and come out so,’ the carpenter said obstinately
and convincingly.
‘It’ll reach the ceiling and the wall.’
‘Upon my word! Why, it’ll go up, and up, and come
out like this.’
Levin took out a ramrod and began sketching him the
staircase in the dust.
‘There, do you see?’
‘As your honor likes,’ said the carpenter, with a sudden
gleam in his eyes, obviously understanding the thing at
last. ‘It seems it’ll be best to make a new one.’
‘Well, then, do it as you’re told,’ Levin shouted, seating
himself in the wagonette. ‘Down! Hold the dogs, Philip!’
Levin felt now at leaving behind all his family and
household cares such an eager sense of joy in life and
expectation that he was not disposed to talk. Besides that,
he had that feeling of concentrated excitement that every
sportsman experiences as he approaches the scene of
action. If he had anything on his mind at that moment, it
was only the doubt whether they would start anything in
the Kolpensky marsh, whether Laska would show to
advantage in comparison with Krak, and whether he
would shoot well that day himself. Not to disgrace himself
Anna Karenina
1251 of 1759
before a new spectator—not to be outdone by
Oblonsky—that too was a thought that crossed his brain.
Oblonsky was feeling the same, and he too was not
talkative. Vassenka Veslovsky kept up alone a ceaseless
flow of cheerful chatter. As he listened to him now, Levin
felt ashamed to think how unfair he had been to him the
day before. Vassenka was really a nice fellow, simple,
good-hearted, and very good-humored. If Levin had met
him before he was married, he would have made friends
with him. Levin rather disliked his holiday attitude to life
and a sort of free and easy assumption of elegance. It was
as though he assumed a high degree of importance in
himself that could not be disputed, because he had long
nails and a stylish cap, and everything else to correspond;
but this could be forgiven for the sake of his good nature
and good breeding. Levin liked him for his good
education, for speaking French and English with such an
excellent accent, and for being a man of his world.
Vassenka was extremely delighted with the left horse, a
horse of the Don Steppes. He kept praising him
enthusiastically. ‘How fine it must be galloping over the
steppes on a steppe horse! Eh? isn’t it?’ he said. He had
imagined riding on a steppe horse as something wild and
romantic, and it turned out nothing of the sort. But his
Anna Karenina
1252 of 1759
simplicity, particularly in conjunction with his good looks,
his amiable smile, and the grace of his movements, was
very attractive. Either because his nature was sympathetic
to Levin, or because Levin was trying to atone for his sins
of the previous evening by seeing nothing but what was
good in him, anyway he liked his society.
After they had driven over two miles from home,
Veslovsky all at once felt for a cigar and his pocketbook,
and did not know whether he had lost them or left them
on the table. In the pocketbook there were thirty-seven
pounds, and so the matter could not be left in uncertainty.
‘Do you know what, Levin, I’ll gallop home on that
left trace-horse. That will be splendid. Eh?’ he said,
preparing to get out.
‘No, why should you?’ answered Levin, calculating that
Vassenka could hardly weigh less than seventeen stone.
‘I’ll send the coachman.’
The coachman rode back on the trace-horse, and Levin
himself drove the remaining pair.
Anna Karenina
1253 of 1759
Chapter 9
‘Well, now what’s our plan of campaign? Tell us all
about it,’ said Stepan Arkadyevitch.
‘Our plan is this. Now we’re driving to Gvozdyov. In
Gvozdyov there’s a grouse marsh on this side, and beyond
Gvozdyov come some magnificent snipe marshes where
there are grouse too. It’s hot now, and we’ll get there—it’s
fifteen miles or so—towards evening and have some
evening shooting; we’ll spend the night there and go on
tomorrow to the bigger moors.’
‘And is there nothing on the way?’
‘Yes; but we’ll reserve ourselves; besides it’s hot. There
are two nice little places, but I doubt there being anything
to shoot.’
Levin would himself have liked to go into these little
places, but they were near home; he could shoot them
over any time, and they were only little places—there
would hardly be room for three to shoot. And so, with
some insincerity, he said that he doubted there being
anything to shoot. When they reached a little marsh Levin
would have driven by, but Stepan Arkadyevitch, with the
Anna Karenina
1254 of 1759
experienced eye of a sportsman, at once detected reeds
visible from the road.
‘Shan’t we try that?’ he said, pointing to the little
marsh.
‘Levin, do, please! how delightful!’ Vassenka Veslovsky
began begging, and Levin could but consent.
Before they had time to stop, the dogs had flown one
before the other into the marsh.
‘Krak! Laska!..’
The dogs came back.
‘There won’t be room for three. I’ll stay here,’ said
Levin, hoping they would find nothing but peewits, who
had been startled by the dogs, and turning over in their
flight, were plaintively wailing over the marsh.
‘No! Come along, Levin, let’s go together!’ Veslovsky
called.
‘Really, there’s not room. Laska, back, Laska! You
won’t want another dog, will you?’
Levin remained with the wagonette, and looked
enviously at the sportsmen. They walked right across the
marsh. Except little birds and peewits, of which Vassenka
killed one, there was nothing in the marsh.
‘Come, you see now that it was not that I grudged the
marsh,’ said Levin, ‘only it’s wasting time.’
Anna Karenina
1255 of 1759
‘Oh, no, it was jolly all the same. Did you see us?’ said
Vassenka Veslovsky, clambering awkwardly into the
wagonette with his gun and his peewit in his hands. ‘How
splendidly I shot this bird! Didn’t I? Well, shall we soon be
getting to the real place?’
The horses started off suddenly, Levin knocked his
head against the stock of someone’s gun, and there was the
report of a shot. The gun did actually go off first, but that
was how it seemed to Levin. It appeared that Vassenka
Veslovsky had pulled only one trigger, and had left the
other hammer still cocked. The charge flew into the
ground without doing harm to anyone. Stepan
Arkadyevitch shook his head and laughed reprovingly at
Veslovsky. But Levin had not the heart to reprove him. In
the first place, any reproach would have seemed to be
called forth by the danger he had incurred and the bump
that had come up on Levin’s forehead. And besides,
Veslovsky was at first so naively distressed, and then
laughed so good-humoredly and infectiously at their
general dismay, that one could not but laugh with him.
When they reached the second marsh, which was fairly
large, and would inevitably take some time to shoot over,
Levin tried to persuade them to pass it by. But Veslovsky
Anna Karenina
1256 of 1759
again overpersuaded him. Again, as the marsh was narrow,
Levin, like a good host, remained with the carriage.
Krak made straight for some clumps of sedge. Vassenka
Veslovsky was the first to run after the dog. Before Stepan
Arkadyevitch had time to come up, a grouse flew out.
Veslovsky missed it and it flew into an unmown meadow.
This grouse was left for Veslovsky to follow up. Krak
found it again and pointed, and Veslovsky shot it and went
back to the carriage. ‘Now you go and I’ll stay with the
horses,’ he said.
Levin had begun to feel the pangs of a sportsman’s
envy. He handed the reins to Veslovsky and walked into
the marsh.
Laska, who had been plaintively whining and fretting
against the injustice of her treatment, flew straight ahead
to a hopeful place that Levin knew well, and that Krak
had not yet come upon.
‘Why don’t you stop her?’ shouted Stepan
Arkadyevitch.
‘She won’t scare them,’ answered Levin, sympathizing
with his bitch’s pleasure and hurrying after her.
As she came nearer and nearer to the familiar breeding
places there was more and more earnestness in Laska’s
exploration. A little marsh bird did not divert her attention
Anna Karenina
1257 of 1759
for more than an instant. She made one circuit round the
clump of reeds, was beginning a second, and suddenly
quivered with excitement and became motionless.
‘Come, come, Stiva!’ shouted Levin, feeling his heart
beginning to beat more violently; and all of a sudden, as
though some sort of shutter had been drawn back from his
straining ears, all sounds, confused but loud, began to beat
on his hearing, losing all sense of distance. He heard the
steps of Stepan Arkadyevitch, mistaking them for the
tramp of the horses in the distance; he heard the brittle
sound of the twigs on which he had trodden, taking this
sound for the flying of a grouse. He heard too, not far
behind him, a splashing in the water, which he could not
explain to himself.
Picking his steps, he moved up to the dog.
‘Fetch it!’
Not a grouse but a snipe flew up from beside the dog.
Levin had lifted his gun, but at the very instant when he
was taking aim, the sound of splashing grew louder, came
closer, and was joined with the sound of Veslovsky’s
voice, shouting something with strange loudness. Levin
saw he had his gun pointed behind the snipe, but still he
fired.
Anna Karenina
1258 of 1759
When he had made sure he had missed, Levin looked
round and saw the horses and the wagonette not on the
road but in the marsh.
Veslovsky, eager to see the shooting, had driven into
the marsh, and got the horses stuck in the mud.
‘Damn the fellow!’ Levin said to himself, as he went
back to the carriage that had sunk in the mire. ‘What did
you drive in for?’ he said to him dryly, and calling the
coachman, he began pulling the horses out.
Levin was vexed both at being hindered from shooting
and at his horses getting stuck in the mud, and still more at
the fact that neither Stepan Arkadyevitch nor Veslovsky
helped him and the coachman to unharness the horses and
get them out, since neither of them had the slightest
notion of harnessing. Without vouchsafing a syllable in
reply to Vassenka’s protestations that it had been quite dry
there, Levin worked in silence with the coachman at
extricating the horses. But then, as he got warm at the
work and saw how assiduously Veslovsky was tugging at
the wagonette by one of the mud-guards, so that he broke
it indeed, Levin blamed himself for having under the
influence of yesterday’s feelings been too cold to
Veslovsky, and tried to be particularly genial so as to
smooth over his chilliness. When everything had been put
Anna Karenina
1259 of 1759
right, and the carriage had been brought back to the road,
Levin had the lunch served.
‘Bon appetit—bonne conscience! Ce poulet va tomber
jusqu’au fond de mes bottes,’ Vassenka, who had
recovered his spirits, quoted the French saying as he
finished his second chicken. ‘Well, now our troubles are
over, now everything’s going to go well. Only, to atone
for my sins, I’m bound to sit on the box. That’s so? eh?
No, no! I’ll be your Automedon. You shall see how I’ll
get you along,’ he answered, not letting go the rein, when
Levin begged him to let the coachman drive. ‘No, I must
atone for my sins, and I’m very comfortable on the box.’
And he drove.
Levin was a little afraid he would exhaust the horses,
especially the chestnut, whom he did not know how to
hold in; but unconsciously he fell under the influence of
his gaiety and listened to the songs he sang all the way on
the box, or the descriptions and representations he gave of
driving in the English fashion, four-in-hand; and it was in
the very best of spirits that after lunch they drove to the
Gvozdyov marsh.
Anna Karenina
1260 of 1759
Chapter 10
Vassenka drove the horses so smartly that they reached
the marsh too early, while it was still hot.
As they drew near this more important marsh, the chief
aim of their expedition, Levin could not help considering
how he could get rid of Vassenka and be free in his
movements. Stepan Arkadyevitch evidently had the same
desire, and on his face Levin saw the look of anxiety
always present in a true sportsman when beginning
shooting, together with a certain good-humored slyness
peculiar to him.
‘How shall we go? It’s a splendid marsh, I see, and
there are hawks,’ said Stepan Arkadyevitch, pointing to
two great birds hovering over the reeds. ‘Where there are
hawks, there is sure to be game.’
‘Now, gentlemen,’ said Levin, pulling up his boots and
examining the lock of his gun with rather a gloomy
expression, ‘do you see those reeds?’ He pointed to an
oasis of blackish green in the huge half-mown wet
meadow that stretched along the right bank of the river.
‘The marsh begins here, straight in front of us, do you
see—where it is greener? From here it runs to the right
Anna Karenina
1261 of 1759
where the horses are; there are breeding places there, and
grouse, and all round those reeds as far as that alder, and
right up to the mill. Over there, do you see, where the
pools are? That’s the best place. There I once shot
seventeen snipe. We’ll separate with the dogs and go in
different directions, and then meet over there at the mill.’
‘Well, which shall go to left and which to right?’ asked
Stepan Arkadyevitch. ‘It’s wider to the right; you two go
that way and I’ll take the left,’ he said with apparent
carelessness.
‘Capital! we’ll make the bigger bag! Yes, come along,
come along!’ Vassenka exclaimed.
Levin could do nothing but agree, and they divided.
As soon as they entered the marsh, the two dogs began
hunting about together and made towards the green,
slime-covered pool. Levin knew Laska’s method, wary and
indefinite; he knew the place too and expected a whole
covey of snipe.
‘Veslovsky, beside me, walk beside me!’ he said in a
faint voice to his companion splashing in the water behind
him. Levin could not help feeling an interest in the
direction his gun was pointed, after that casual shot near
the Kolpensky marsh.
‘Oh, I won’t get in your way, don’t trouble about me.’
Anna Karenina
1262 of 1759
But Levin could not help troubling, and recalled Kitty’s
words at parting: ‘Mind you don’t shoot one another.’
The dogs came nearer and nearer, passed each other, each
pursuing its own scent. The expectation of snipe was so
intense that to Levin the squelching sound of his own
heel, as he drew it up out of the mire, seemed to be the
call of a snipe, and he clutched and pressed the lock of his
gun.
‘Bang! bang!’ sounded almost in his ear. Vassenka had
fired at a flock of ducks which was hovering over the
marsh and flying at that moment towards the sportsmen,
far out of range. Before Levin had time to look round,
there was the whir of one snipe, another, a third, and
some eight more rose one after another.
Stepan Arkadyevitch hit one at the very moment when
it was beginning its zigzag movements, and the snipe fell
in a heap into the mud. Oblonsky aimed deliberately at
another, still flying low in the reeds, and together with the
report of the shot, that snipe too fell, and it could be seen
fluttering out where the sedge had been cut, its unhurt
wing showing white beneath.
Levin was not so lucky: he aimed at his first bird too
low, and missed; he aimed at it again, just as it was rising,
Anna Karenina
1263 of 1759
but at that instant another snipe flew up at his very feet,
distracting him so that he missed again.
While they were loading their guns, another snipe rose,
and Veslovsky, who had had time to load again, sent two
charges of small-shot into the water. Stepan Arkadyevitch
picked up his snipe, and with sparkling eyes looked at
Levin.
‘Well, now let us separate,’ said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
and limping on his left foot, holding his gun in readiness
and whistling to his dog, he walked off in one direction.
Levin and Veslovsky walked in the other.
It always happened with Levin that when his first shots
were a failure he got hot and out of temper, and shot
badly the whole day. So it was that day. The snipe showed
themselves in numbers. They kept flying up from just
under the dogs, from under the sportsmen’s legs, and
Levin might have retrieved his ill luck. But the more he
shot, the more he felt disgraced in the eyes of Veslovsky,
who kept popping away merrily and indiscriminately,
killing nothing, and not in the slightest abashed by his ill
success. Levin, in feverish haste, could not restrain himself,
got more and more out of temper, and ended by shooting
almost without a hope of hitting. Laska, indeed, seemed to
understand this. She began looking more languidly, and
Anna Karenina
1264 of 1759
gazed back at the sportsmen, as it were, with perplexity or
reproach in her eyes. Shots followed shots in rapid
succession. The smoke of the powder hung about the
sportsmen, while in the great roomy net of the game bag
there were only three light little snipe. And of these one
had been killed by Veslovsky alone, and one by both of
them together. Meanwhile from the other side of the
marsh came the sound of Stepan Arkadyevitch’s shots, not
frequent, but, as Levin fancied, well-directed, for almost
after each they heard ‘Krak, Krak, apporte!’
This excited Levin still more. The snipe were floating
continually in the air over the reeds. Their whirring wings
close to the earth, and their harsh cries high in the air,
could be heard on all sides; the snipe that had risen first
and flown up into the air, settled again before the
sportsmen. Instead of two hawks there were now dozens
of them hovering with shrill cries over the marsh.
After walking through the larger half of the marsh,
Levin and Veslovsky reached the place where the peasants’
mowing-grass was divided into long strips reaching to the
reeds, marked off in one place by the trampled grass, in
another by a path mown through it. Half of these strips
had already been mown.
Anna Karenina
1265 of 1759
Though there was not so much hope of finding birds in
the uncut part as the cut part, Levin had promised Stepan
Arkadyevitch to meet him, and so he walked on with his
companion through the cut and uncut patches.
‘Hi, sportsmen!’ shouted one of a group of peasants,
sitting on an unharnessed cart; ‘come and have some lunch
with us! Have a drop of wine!’
Levin looked round.
‘Come along, it’s all right!’ shouted a good-humoredlooking bearded peasant with a red face, showing his
white teeth in a grin, and holding up a greenish bottle that
flashed in the sunlight.
‘Qu’est-ce qu’ils disent?’ asked Veslovsky.
‘They invite you to have some vodka. Most likely
they’ve been dividing the meadow into lots. I should have
some,’ said Levin, not without some guile, hoping
Veslovsky would be tempted by the vodka, and would go
away to them.
‘Why do they offer it?’
‘Oh, they’re merry-making. Really, you should join
them. You would be interested.’
‘Allons, c’est curieux.’
‘You go, you go, you’ll find the way to the mill!’ cried
Levin, and looking round he perceived with satisfaction
Anna Karenina
1266 of 1759
that Veslovsky, bent and stumbling with weariness,
holding his gun out at arm’s length, was making his way
out of the marsh towards the peasants.
‘You come too!’ the peasants shouted to Levin. ‘Never
fear! You taste our cake!’
Levin felt a strong inclination to drink a little vodka
and to eat some bread. He was exhausted, and felt it a
great effort to drag his staggering legs out of the mire, and
for a minute he hesitated. But Laska was setting. And
immediately all his weariness vanished, and he walked
lightly through the swamp towards the dog. A snipe flew
up at his feet; he fired and killed it. Laska still pointed.—
‘Fetch it!’ Another bird flew up close to the dog. Levin
fired. But it was an unlucky day for him; he missed it, and
when he went to look for the one he had shot, he could
not find that either. He wandered all about the reeds, but
Laska did not believe he had shot it, and when he sent her
to find it, she pretended to hunt for it, but did not really.
And in the absence of Vassenka, on whom Levin threw
the blame of his failure, things went no better. There were
plenty of snipe still, but Levin made one miss after
another.
The slanting rays of the sun were still hot; his clothes,
soaked through with perspiration, stuck to his body; his
Anna Karenina
1267 of 1759
left boot full of water weighed heavily on his leg and
squeaked at every step; the sweat rain in drops down his
powder-grimed face, his mouth was full of the bitter taste,
his nose of the smell of powder and stagnant water, his
ears were ringing with the incessant whir of the snipe; he
could not touch the stock of his gun, it was so hot; his
heart beat with short, rapid throbs; his hands shook with
excitement, and his weary legs stumbled and staggered
over the hillocks and in the swamp, but still he walked on
and still he shot. At last, after a disgraceful miss, he flung
his gun and his hat on the ground.
‘No, I must control myself,’ he said to himself. Picking
up his gun and his hat, he called Laska, and went out of
the swamp. When he got on to dry ground he sat down,
pulled off his boot and emptied it, then walked to the
marsh, drank some stagnant-tasting water, moistened his
burning hot gun, and washed his face and hands. Feeling
refreshed, he went back to the spot where a snipe had
settled, firmly resolved to keep cool.
He tried to be calm, but it was the same again. His
finger pressed the cock before he had taken a good aim at
the bird. It got worse and worse.
Anna Karenina
1268 of 1759
He had only five birds in his game-bag when he
walked out of the marsh towards the alders where he was
to rejoin Stepan Arkadyevitch.
Before he caught sight of Stepan Arkadyevitch he saw
his dog. Krak darted out from behind the twisted root of
an alder, black all over with the stinking mire of the
marsh, and with the air of a conqueror sniffed at Laska.
Behind Krak there came into view in the shade of the
alder tree the shapely figure of Stepan Arkadyevitch. He
came to meet him, red and perspiring, with unbuttoned
neckband, still limping in the same way.
‘Well? You have been popping away!’ he said, smiling
good-humoredly.
‘How have you got on?’ queried Levin. But there was
no need to ask, for he had already seen the full game bag.
‘Oh, pretty fair.’
He had fourteen birds.
‘A splendid marsh! I’ve no doubt Veslovsky got in your
way. It’s awkward too, shooting with one dog,’ said
Stepan Arkadyevitch, to soften his triumph.
Anna Karenina
1269 of 1759
Chapter 11
When Levin and Stepan Arkadyevitch reached the
peasant’s hut where Levin always used to stay, Veslovsky
was already there. He was sitting in the middle of the hut,
clinging with both hands to the bench from which he was
being pulled by a soldier, the brother of the peasant’s wife,
who was helping him off with his miry boots. Veslovsky
was laughing his infectious, good-humored laugh.
‘I’ve only just come. Ils ont ete charmants. Just fancy,
they gave me drink, fed me! Such bread, it was exquisite!
Delicieux! And the vodka, I never tasted any better. And
they would not take a penny for anything. And they kept
saying: ‘Excuse our homely ways.’’
‘What should they take anything for? They were
entertaining you, to be sure. Do you suppose they keep
vodka for sale?’ said the soldier, succeeding at last in
pulling the soaked boot off the blackened stocking.
In spite of the dirtiness of the hut, which was all
muddied by their boots and the filthy dogs licking
themselves clean, and the smell of marsh mud and powder
that filled the room, and the absence of knives and forks,
the party drank their tea and ate their supper with a relish
Anna Karenina
1270 of 1759
only known to sportsmen. Washed and clean, they went
into a hay-barn swept ready for them, where the
coachman had been making up beds for the gentlemen.
Though it was dusk, not one of them wanted to go to
sleep.
After wavering among reminiscences and anecdotes of
guns, of dogs, and of former shooting parties, the
conversation rested on a topic that interested all of them.
After Vassenka had several times over expressed his
appreciation of this delightful sleeping place among the
fragrant hay, this delightful broken cart (he supposed it to
be broken because the shafts had been taken out), of the
good nature of the peasants that had treated him to vodka,
of the dogs who lay at the feet of their respective masters,
Oblonsky began telling them of a delightful shooting party
at Malthus’s, where he had stayed the previous summer.
Malthus was a well-known capitalist, who had made his
money by speculation in railway shares. Stepan
Arkadyevitch described what grouse moors this Malthus
had bought in the Tver province, and how they were
preserved, and of the carriages and dogcarts in which the
shooting party had been driven, and the luncheon pavilion
that had been rigged up at the marsh.
Anna Karenina
1271 of 1759
‘I don’t understand you,’ said Levin, sitting up in the
hay; ‘how is it such people don’t disgust you? I can
understand a lunch with Lafitte is all very pleasant, but
don’t you dislike just that very sumptuousness? All these
people, just like our spirit monopolists in old days, get
their money in a way that gains them the contempt of
everyone. They don’t care for their contempt, and then
they use their dishonest gains to buy off the contempt they
have deserved.’
‘Perfectly true!’ chimed in Vassenka Veslovsky.
‘Perfectly! Oblonsky, of course, goes out of bonhomie,
but other people say: ‘Well, Oblonsky stays with them.’..’
‘Not a bit of it.’ Levin could hear that Oblonsky was
smiling as he spoke. ‘I simply don’t consider him more
dishonest than any other wealthy merchant or nobleman.
They’ve all made their money alike—by their work and
their intelligence.’
‘Oh, by what work? Do you call it work to get hold of
concessions and speculate with them?’
‘Of course it’s work. Work in this sense, that if it were
not for him and others like him, there would have been
no railways.’
‘But that’s not work, like the work of a peasant or a
learned profession.’
Anna Karenina
1272 of 1759
‘Granted, but it’s work in the sense that his activity
produces a result—the railways. But of course you think
the railways useless.’
‘No, that’s another question; I am prepared to admit
that they’re useful. But all profit that is out of proportion
to the labor expended is dishonest.’
‘But who is to define what is proportionate?’
‘Making profit by dishonest means, by trickery,’ said
Levin, conscious that he could not draw a distinct line
between honesty and dishonesty. ‘Such as banking, for
instance,’ he went on. ‘It’s an evil—the amassing of huge
fortunes without labor, just the same thing as with the
spirit monopolies, it’s only the form that’s changed. Le roi
est mort, vive le roi. No sooner were the spirit
monopolies abolished than the railways came up, and
banking companies; that, too, is profit without work.’
‘Yes, that may all be very true and clever.... Lie down,
Krak!’ Stepan Arkadyevitch called to his dog, who was
scratching and turning over all the hay. He was obviously
convinced of the correctness of his position, and so talked
serenely and without haste. ‘But you have not drawn the
line between honest and dishonest work. That I receive a
bigger salary than my chief clerk, though he knows more
about the work than I do—that’s dishonest, I suppose?’
Anna Karenina
1273 of 1759
‘I can’t say.’
‘Well, but I can tell you: your receiving some five
thousand, let’s say, for your work on the land, while our
host, the peasant here, however hard he works, can never
get more than fifty roubles, is just as dishonest as my
earning more than my chief clerk, and Malthus getting
more than a station-master. No, quite the contrary; I see
that society takes up a sort of antagonistic attitude to these
people, which is utterly baseless, and I fancy there’s envy
at the bottom of it...’
‘No, that’s unfair,’ said Veslovsky; ‘how could envy
come in? There is something not nice about that sort of
business.’
‘You say,’ Levin went on, ‘that it’s unjust for me to
receive five thousand, while the peasant has fifty; that’s
true. It is unfair, and I feel it, but..’
‘It really is. Why is it we spend our time riding,
drinking, shooting, doing nothing, while they are forever
at work?’ said Vassenka Veslovsky, obviously for the first
time in his life reflecting on the question, and
consequently considering it with perfect sincerity.
‘Yes, you feel it, but you don’t give him your
property,’ said Stepan Arkadyevitch, intentionally, as it
seemed, provoking Levin.
Anna Karenina
1274 of 1759
There had arisen of late something like a secret
antagonism between the two brothers-in-law; as though,
since they had married sisters, a kind of rivalry had sprung
up between them as to which was ordering his life best,
and now this hostility showed itself in the conversation, as
it began to take a personal note.
‘I don’t give it away, because no one demands that
from me, and if I wanted to, I could not give it away,’
answered Levin, ‘and have no one to give it to.’
‘Give it to this peasant, he would not refuse it.’
‘Yes, but how am I to give it up? Am I to go to him
and make a deed of conveyance?’
‘I don’t know; but if you are convinced that you have
no right..’
‘I’m not at all convinced. On the contrary, I feel I have
no right to give it up, that I have duties both to the land
and to my family.’
‘No, excuse me, but if you consider this inequality is
unjust, why is it you don’t act accordingly?..’
‘Well, I do act negatively on that idea, so far as not
trying to increase the difference of position existing
between him and me.’
‘No, excuse me, that’s a paradox.’
Anna Karenina
1275 of 1759
‘Yes, there’s something of a sophistry about that,’
Veslovsky agreed. ‘Ah! our host; so you’re not asleep yet?’
he said to the peasant who came into the barn, opening
the creaking door. ‘How is it you’re not asleep?’
‘No, how’s one to sleep! I thought our gentlemen
would be asleep, but I heard them chattering. I want to
get a hook from here. She won’t bite?’ he added, stepping
cautiously with his bare feet.
‘And where are you going to sleep?’
‘We are going out for the night with the beasts.’
‘Ah, what a night!’ said Veslovsky, looking out at the
edge of the hut and the unharnessed wagonette that could
be seen in the faint light of the evening glow in the great
frame of the open doors. ‘But listen, there are women’s
voices singing, and, on my word, not badly too. Who’s
that singing, my friend?’
‘That’s the maids from hard by here.’
‘Let’s go, let’s have a walk! We shan’t go to sleep, you
know. Oblonsky, come along!’
‘If one could only do both, lie here and go,’ answered
Oblonsky, stretching. ‘It’s capital lying here.’
‘Well, I shall go by myself,’ said Veslovsky, getting up
eagerly, and putting on his shoes and stockings. ‘Good-
Anna Karenina
1276 of 1759
bye, gentlemen. If it’s fun, I’ll fetch you. You’ve treated
me to some good sport, and I won’t forget you.’
‘He really is a capital fellow, isn’t he?’ said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, when Veslovsky had gone out and the
peasant had closed the door after him.
‘Yes, capital,’ answered Levin, still thinking of the
subject of their conversation just before. It seemed to him
that he had clearly expressed his thoughts and feelings to
the best of his capacity, and yet both of them,
straightforward men and not fools, had said with one voice
that he was comforting himself with sophistries. This
disconcerted him.
‘It’s just this, my dear boy. One must do one of two
things: either admit that the existing order of society is
just, and then stick up for one’s rights in it; or
acknowledge that you are enjoying unjust privileges, as I
do, and then enjoy them and be satisfied.’
‘No, if it were unjust, you could not enjoy these
advantages and be satisfied—at least I could not. The great
thing for me is to feel that I’m not to blame.’
‘What do you say, why not go after all?’ said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, evidently weary of the strain of thought.
‘We shan’t go to sleep, you know. Come, let’s go!’
Anna Karenina
1277 of 1759
Levin did not answer. What they had said in the
conversation, that he acted justly only in a negative sense,
absorbed his thoughts. ‘Can it be that it’s only possible to
be just negatively?’ he was asking himself.
‘How strong the smell of the fresh hay is, though,’ said
Stepan Arkadyevitch, getting up. ‘There’s not a chance of
sleeping. Vassenka has been getting up some fun there. Do
you hear the laughing and his voice? Hadn’t we better go?
Come along!’
‘No, I’m not coming,’ answered Levin.
‘Surely that’s not a matter of principle too,’ said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, smiling, as he felt about in the dark for his
cap.
‘It’s not a matter of principle, but why should I go?’
‘But do you know you are preparing trouble for
yourself,’ said Stepan Arkadyevitch, finding his cap and
getting up.
‘How so?’
‘Do you suppose I don’t see the line you’ve taken up
with your wife? I heard how it’s a question of the greatest
consequence, whether or not you’re to be away for a
couple of days’ shooting. That’s all very well as an idyllic
episode, but for your whole life that won’t answer. A man
Anna Karenina
1278 of 1759
must be independent; he has his masculine interests. A
man has to be manly,’ said Oblonsky, opening the door.
‘In what way? To go running after servant girls?’ said
Levin.
‘Why not, if it amuses him? Ca ne tire pas a
consequence. It won’t do my wife any harm, and it’ll
amuse me. The great thing is to respect the sanctity of the
home. There should be nothing in the home. But don’t
tie your own hands.’
‘Perhaps so,’ said Levin dryly, and he turned on his
side. ‘Tomorrow, early, I want to go shooting, and I
won’t wake anyone, and shall set off at daybreak.’
‘Messieurs, venes vite!’ they heard the voice of
Veslovsky coming back. ‘Charmante! I’ve made such a
discovery. Charmante! a perfect Gretchen, and I’ve already
made friends with her. Really, exceedingly pretty,’ he
declared in a tone of approval, as though she had been
made pretty entirely on his account, and he was expressing
his satisfaction with the entertainment that had been
provided for him.
Levin pretended to be asleep, while Oblonsky, putting
on his slippers, and lighting a cigar, walked out of the
barn, and soon their voices were lost.
Anna Karenina
1279 of 1759
For a long while Levin could not get to sleep. He heard
the horses munching hay, then he heard the peasant and
his elder boy getting ready for the night, and going off for
the night watch with the beasts, then he heard the soldier
arranging his bed on the other side of the barn, with his
nephew, the younger son of their peasant host. He heard
the boy in his shrill little voice telling his uncle what he
thought about the dogs, who seemed to him huge and
terrible creatures, and asking what the dogs were going to
hunt next day, and the soldier in a husky, sleepy voice,
telling him the sportsmen were going in the morning to
the marsh, and would shoot with their guns; and then, to
check the boy’s questions, he said, ‘Go to sleep, Vaska; go
to sleep, or you’ll catch it,’ and soon after he began
snoring himself, and everything was still. He could only
hear the snort of the horses, and the guttural cry of a snipe.
‘Is it really only negative?’ he repeated to himself.
‘Well, what of it? It’s not my fault.’ And he began
thinking about the next day.
‘Tomorrow I’ll go out early, and I’ll make a point of
keeping cool. There are lots of snipe; and there are grouse
too. When I come back there’ll be the note from Kitty.
Yes, Stiva may be right, I’m not manly with her, I’m tied
Anna Karenina
1280 of 1759
to her apron-strings.... Well, it can’t be helped! Negative
again...’
Half asleep, he heard the laughter and mirthful talk of
Veslovsky and Stepan Arkadyevitch. For an instant he
opened his eyes: the moon was up, and in the open
doorway, brightly lighted up by the moonlight, they were
standing talking. Stepan Arkadyevitch was saying
something of the freshness of one girl, comparing her to a
freshly peeled nut, and Veslovsky with his infectious laugh
was repeating some words, probably said to him by a
peasant: ‘Ah, you do your best to get round her!’ Levin,
half asleep, said:
‘Gentlemen, tomorrow before daylight!’ and fell asleep.
Anna Karenina
1281 of 1759
Chapter 12
Waking up at earliest dawn, Levin tried to wake his
companions. Vassenka, lying on his stomach, with one leg
in a stocking thrust out, was sleeping so soundly that he
could elicit no response. Oblonsky, half asleep, declined to
get up so early. Even Laska, who was asleep, curled up in
the hay, got up unwillingly, and lazily stretched out and
straightened her hind legs one after the other. Getting on
his boots and stockings, taking his gun, and carefully
opening the creaking door of the barn, Levin went out
into the road. The coachmen were sleeping in their
carriages, the horses were dozing. Only one was lazily
eating oats, dipping its nose into the manger. It was still
gray out-of-doors.
‘Why are you up so early, my dear?’ the old woman,
their hostess, said, coming out of the hut and addressing
him affectionately as an old friend.
‘Going shooting, granny. Do I go this way to the
marsh?’
‘Straight out at the back; by our threshing floor, my
dear, and hemp patches; there’s a little footpath.’ Stepping
carefully with her sunburnt, bare feet, the old woman
Anna Karenina
1282 of 1759
conducted Levin, and moved back the fence for him by
the threshing floor.
‘Straight on and you’ll come to the marsh. Our lads
drove the cattle there yesterday evening.’
Laska ran eagerly forward along the little path. Levin
followed her with a light, rapid step, continually looking
at the sky. He hoped the sun would not be up before he
reached the marsh. But the sun did not delay. The moon,
which had been bright when he went out, by now shone
only like a crescent of quicksilver. The pink flush of dawn,
which one could not help seeing before, now had to be
sought to be discerned at all. What were before undefined,
vague blurs in the distant countryside could now be
distinctly seen. They were sheaves of rye. The dew, not
visible till the sun was up, wetted Levin’s legs and his
blouse above his belt in the high growing, fragrant hemp
patch, from which the pollen had already fallen out. In the
transparent stillness of morning the smallest sounds were
audible. A bee flew by Levin’s ear with the whizzing
sound of a bullet. He looked carefully, and saw a second
and a third. They were all flying from the beehives behind
the hedge, and they disappeared over the hemp patch in
the direction of the marsh. The path led straight to the
marsh. The marsh could be recognized by the mist which
Anna Karenina
1283 of 1759
rose from it, thicker in one place and thinner in another,
so that the reeds and willow bushes swayed like islands in
this mist. At the edge of the marsh and the road, peasant
boys and men, who had been herding for the night, were
lying, and in the dawn all were asleep under their coats.
Not far from them were three hobbled horses. One of
them clanked a chain. Laska walked beside her master,
pressing a little forward and looking round. Passing the
sleeping peasants and reaching the first reeds, Levin
examined his pistols and let his dog off. One of the horses,
a sleek, dark-brown three-year-old, seeing the dog, started
away, switched its tail and snorted. The other horses too
were frightened, and splashing through the water with
their hobbled legs, and drawing their hoofs out of the
thick mud with a squelching sound, they bounded out of
the marsh. Laska stopped, looking ironically at the horses
and inquiringly at Levin. Levin patted Laska, and whistled
as a sign that she might begin.
Laska ran joyfully and anxiously through the slush that
swayed under her.
Running into the marsh among the familiar scents of
roots, marsh plants, and slime, and the extraneous smell of
horse dung, Laska detected at once a smell that pervaded
the whole marsh, the scent of that strong-smelling bird
Anna Karenina
1284 of 1759
that always excited her more than any other. Here and
there among the moss and marsh plants this scent was very
strong, but it was impossible to determine in which
direction it grew stronger or fainter. To find the direction,
she had to go farther away from the wind. Not feeling the
motion of her legs, Laska bounded with a stiff gallop, so
that at each bound she could stop short, to the right, away
from the wind that blew from the east before sunrise, and
turned facing the wind. Sniffing in the air with dilated
nostrils, she felt at once that not their tracks only but they
themselves were here before her, and not one, but many.
Laska slackened her speed. They were here, but where
precisely she could not yet determine. To find the very
spot, she began to make a circle, when suddenly her
master’s voice drew her off. ‘Laska! here?’ he asked,
pointing her to a different direction. She stopped, asking
him if she had better not go on doing as she had begun.
But he repeated his command in an angry voice, pointing
to a spot covered with water, where there could not be
anything. She obeyed him, pretending she was looking, so
as to please him, went round it, and went back to her
former position, and was at once aware of the scent again.
Now when he was not hindering her, she knew what to
do, and without looking at what was under her feet, and
Anna Karenina
1285 of 1759
to her vexation stumbling over a high stump into the
water, but righting herself with her strong, supple legs, she
began making the circle which was to make all clear to
her. The scent of them reached her, stronger and stronger,
and more and more defined, and all at once it became
perfectly clear to her that one of them was here, behind
this tuft of reeds, five paces in front of her; she stopped,
and her whole body was still and rigid. On her short legs
she could see nothing in front of her, but by the scent she
knew it was sitting not more than five paces off. She stood
still, feeling more and more conscious of it, and enjoying
it in anticipation. Her tail was stretched straight and tense,
and only wagging at the extreme end. Her mouth was
slightly open, her ears raised. One ear had been turned
wrong side out as she ran up, and she breathed heavily but
warily, and still more warily looked round, but more with
her eyes than her head, to her master. He was coming
along with the face she knew so well, though the eyes
were always terrible to her. He stumbled over the stump
as he came, and moved, as she thought, extraordinarily
slowly. She thought he came slowly, but he was running.
Noticing Laska’s special attitude as she crouched on the
ground, as it were, scratching big prints with her hind
paws, and with her mouth slightly open, Levin knew she
Anna Karenina
1286 of 1759
was pointing at grouse, and with an inward prayer for
luck, especially with the first bird, he ran up to her.
Coming quite close up to her, he could from his height
look beyond her, and he saw with his eyes what she was
seeing with her nose. In a space between two little
thickets, to a couple of yards’ distance, he could see a
grouse. Turning its head, it was listening. Then lightly
preening and folding its wings, it disappeared round a
corner with a clumsy wag of its tail.
‘Fetch it, fetch it!’ shouted Levin, giving Laska a shove
from behind.
‘But I can’t go,’ thought Laska. ‘Where am I to go?
From here I feel them, but if I move forward I shall know
nothing of where they are or who they are.’ But then he
shoved her with his knee, and in an excited whisper said,
‘Fetch it, Laska.’
‘Well, if that’s what he wishes, I’ll do it, but I can’t
answer for myself now,’ she thought, and darted forward
as fast as her legs would carry her between the thick
bushes. She scented nothing now; she could only see and
hear, without understanding anything.
Ten paces from her former place a grouse rose with a
guttural cry and the peculiar round sound of its wings.
And immediately after the shot it splashed heavily with its
Anna Karenina
1287 of 1759
white breast on the wet mire. Another bird did not linger,
but rose behind Levin without the dog. When Levin
turned towards it, it was already some way off. But his
shot caught it. Flying twenty paces further, the second
grouse rose upwards, and whirling round like a ball,
dropped heavily on a dry place.
‘Come, this is going to be some good!’ thought Levin,
packing the warm and fat grouse into his game bag. ‘Eh,
Laska, will it be good?’
When Levin, after loading his gun, moved on, the sun
had fully risen, though unseen behind the storm-clouds.
The moon had lost all of its luster, and was like a white
cloud in the sky. Not a single star could be seen. The
sedge, silvery with dew before, now shone like gold. The
stagnant pools were all like amber. The blue of the grass
had changed to yellow-green. The marsh birds twittered
and swarmed about the brook and upon the bushes that
glittered with dew and cast long shadows. A hawk woke
up and settled on a haycock, turning its head from side to
side and looking discontentedly at the marsh. Crows were
flying about the field, and a bare-legged boy was driving
the horses to an old man, who had got up from under his
long coat and was combing his hair. The smoke from the
gun was white as milk over the green of the grass.
Anna Karenina
1288 of 1759
One of the boys ran up to Levin.
‘Uncle, there were ducks here yesterday!’ he shouted to
him, and he walked a little way off behind him.
And Levin was doubly pleased, in sight of the boy, who
expressed his approval, at killing three snipe, one after
another, straight off.
Anna Karenina
1289 of 1759
Chapter 13
The sportsman’s saying, that if the first beast or the first
bird is not missed, the day will be lucky, turned out
correct.
At ten o’clock Levin, weary, hungry, and happy after a
tramp of twenty miles, returned to his night’s lodging with
nineteen head of fine game and one duck, which he tied
to his belt, as it would not go into the game bag. His
companions had long been awake, and had had time to get
hungry and have breakfast.
‘Wait a bit, wait a bit, I know there are nineteen,’ said
Levin, counting a second time over the grouse and snipe,
that looked so much less important now, bent and dry and
bloodstained, with heads crooked aside, than they did
when they were flying.
The number was verified, and Stepan Arkadyevitch’s
envy pleased Levin. He was pleased too on returning to
find the man sent by Kitty with a note was already there.
‘I am perfectly well and happy. If you were uneasy
about me, you can feel easier than ever. I’ve a new
bodyguard, Marya Vlasyevna,’— this was the midwife, a
new and important personage in Levin’s domestic life.
Anna Karenina
1290 of 1759
‘She has come to have a look at me. She found me
perfectly well, and we have kept her till you are back. All
are happy and well, and please, don’t be in a hurry to
come back, but, if the sport is good, stay another day.’
These two pleasures, his lucky shooting and the letter
from his wife, were so great that two slightly disagreeable
incidents passed lightly over Levin. One was that the
chestnut trace horse, who had been unmistakably
overworked on the previous day, was off his feed and out
of sorts. The coachman said he was ‘Overdriven yesterday,
Konstantin Dmitrievitch. Yes, indeed! driven ten miles
with no sense!’
The other unpleasant incident, which for the first
minute destroyed his good humor, though later he
laughed at it a great deal, was to find that of all the
provisions Kitty had provided in such abundance that one
would have thought there was enough for a week,
nothing was left. On his way back, tired and hungry from
shooting, Levin had so distinct a vision of meat-pies that as
he approached the hut he seemed to smell and taste them,
as Laska had smelt the game, and he immediately told
Philip to give him some. It appeared that there were no
pies left, nor even any chicken.
Anna Karenina
1291 of 1759
‘Well, this fellow’s appetite!’ said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
laughing and pointing at Vassenka Veslovsky. ‘I never
suffer from loss of appetite, but he’s really marvelous!..’
‘Well, it can’t be helped,’ said Levin, looking gloomily
at Veslovsky. ‘Well, Philip, give me some beef, then.’
‘The beef’s been eaten, and the bones given to the
dogs,’ answered Philip.
Levin was so hurt that he said, in a tone of vexation,
‘You might have left me something!’ and he felt ready to
cry.
‘Then put away the game,’ he said in a shaking voice to
Philip, trying not to look at Vassenka, ‘and cover them
with some nettles. And you might at least ask for some
milk for me.’
But when he had drunk some milk, he felt ashamed
immediately at having shown his annoyance to a stranger,
and he began to laugh at his hungry mortification.
In the evening they went shooting again, and
Veslovsky had several successful shots, and in the night
they drove home.
Their homeward journey was as lively as their drive out
had been. Veslovsky sang songs and related with
enjoyment his adventures with the peasants, who had
regaled him with vodka, and said to him, ‘Excuse our
Anna Karenina
1292 of 1759
homely ways,’ and his night’s adventures with kiss-in-thering and the servant-girl and the peasant, who had asked
him was he married, and on learning that he was not, said
to him, ‘Well, mind you don’t run after other men’s
wives—you’d better get one of your own.’ These words
had particularly amused Veslovsky.
‘Altogether, I’ve enjoyed our outing awfully. And you,
Levin?’
‘I have, very much,’ Levin said quite sincerely. It was
particularly delightful to him to have got rid of the
hostility he had been feeling towards Vassenka Veslovsky
at home, and to feel instead the most friendly disposition
to him.
Anna Karenina
1293 of 1759
Chapter 14
Next day at ten o’clock Levin, who had already gone
his rounds, knocked at the room where Vassenka had been
put for the night.
‘Entrez!’ Veslovsky called to him. ‘Excuse me, I’ve only
just finished my ablutions,’ he said, smiling, standing
before him in his underclothes only.
‘Don’t mind me, please.’ Levin sat down in the
window. ‘Have you slept well?’
‘Like the dead. What sort of day is it for shooting?’
‘What will you take, tea or coffee?’
‘Neither. I’ll wait till lunch. I’m really ashamed. I
suppose the ladies are down? A walk now would be
capital. You show me your horses.’
After walking about the garden, visiting the stable, and
even doing some gymnastic exercises together on the
parallel bars, Levin returned to the house with his guest,
and went with him into the drawing room.
‘We had splendid shooting, and so many delightful
experiences!’ said Veslovsky, going up to Kitty, who was
sitting at the samovar. ‘What a pity ladies are cut off from
these delights!’
Anna Karenina
1294 of 1759
‘Well, I suppose he must say something to the lady of
the house,’ Levin said to himself. Again he fancied
something in the smile, in the all-conquering air with
which their guest addressed Kitty....
The princess, sitting on the other side of the table with
Marya Vlasyevna and Stepan Arkadyevitch, called Levin to
her side, and began to talk to him about moving to
Moscow for Kitty’s confinement, and getting ready rooms
for them. Just as Levin had disliked all the trivial
preparations for his wedding, as derogatory to the
grandeur of the event, now he felt still more offensive the
preparations for the approaching birth, the date of which
they reckoned, it seemed, on their fingers. He tried to
turn a deaf ear to these discussions of the best patterns of
long clothes for the coming baby; tried to turn away and
avoid seeing the mysterious, endless strips of knitting, the
triangles of linen, and so on, to which Dolly attached
special importance. The birth of a son (he was certain it
would be a son) which was promised him, but which he
still could not believe in—so marvelous it seemed—
presented itself to his mind, on one hand, as a happiness so
immense, and therefore so incredible; on the other, as an
event so mysterious, that this assumption of a definite
knowledge of what would be, and consequent preparation
Anna Karenina
1295 of 1759
for it, as for something ordinary that did happen to people,
jarred on him as confusing and humiliating.
But the princess did not understand his feelings, and
put down his reluctance to think and talk about it to
carelessness and indifference, and so she gave him no
peace. She had commissioned Stepan Arkadyevitch to
look at a fiat, and now she called Levin up.
‘I know nothing about it, princess. Do as you think fit,’
he said.
‘You must decide when you will move.’
‘I really don’t know. I know millions of children are
born away from Moscow, and doctors...why..’
‘But if so..’
‘Oh, no, as Kitty wishes.’
‘We can’t talk to Kitty about it! Do you want me to
frighten her? Why, this spring Natalia Golitzina died from
having an ignorant doctor.’
‘I will do just what you say,’ he said gloomily.
The princess began talking to him, but he did not hear
her. Though the conversation with the princess had
indeed jarred upon him, he was gloomy, not on account
of that conversation, but from what he saw at the samovar.
Anna Karenina
1296 of 1759
‘No, it’s impossible,’ he thought, glancing now and
then at Vassenka bending over Kitty, telling her something
with his charming smile, and at her, flushed and disturbed.
There was something not nice in Vassenka’s attitude, in
his eyes, in his smile. Levin even saw something not nice
in Kitty’s attitude and look. And again the light died away
in his eyes. Again, as before, all of a sudden, without the
slightest transition, he felt cast down from a pinnacle of
happiness, peace, and dignity, into an abyss of despair,
rage, and humiliation. Again everything and everyone had
become hateful to him.
‘You do just as you think best, princess,’ he said again,
looking round.
‘Heavy is the cap of Monomach,’ Stepan Arkadyevitch
said playfully, hinting, evidently, not simply at the
princess’s conversation, but at the cause of Levin’s
agitation, which he had noticed.
‘How late you are today, Dolly!’
Everyone got up to greet Darya Alexandrovna.
Vassenka only rose for an instant, and with the lack of
courtesy to ladies characteristic of the modern young man,
he scarcely bowed, and resumed his conversation again,
laughing at something.
Anna Karenina
1297 of 1759
‘I’ve been worried about Masha. She did not sleep well,
and is dreadfully tiresome today,’ said Dolly.
The conversation Vassenka had started with Kitty was
running on the same lines as on the previous evening,
discussing Anna, and whether love is to be put higher than
worldly considerations. Kitty disliked the conversation,
and she was disturbed both by the subject and the tone in
which it was conducted, and also by the knowledge of the
effect it would have on her husband. But she was too
simple and innocent to know how to cut short this
conversation, or even to conceal the superficial pleasure
afforded her by the young man’s very obvious admiration.
She wanted to stop it, but she did not know what to do.
Whatever she did she knew would be observed by her
husband, and the worst interpretation put on it. And, in
fact, when she asked Dolly what was wrong with Masha,
and Vassenka, waiting till this uninteresting conversation
was over, began to gaze indifferently at Dolly, the
question struck Levin as an unnatural and disgusting piece
of hypocrisy.
‘What do you say, shall we go and look for mushrooms
today?’ said Dolly.
‘By all means, please, and I shall come too,’ said Kitty,
and she blushed. She wanted from politeness to ask
Anna Karenina
1298 of 1759
Vassenka whether he would come, and she did not ask
him. ‘Where are you going, Kostya?’ she asked her
husband with a guilty face, as he passed by her with a
resolute step. This guilty air confirmed all his suspicions.
‘The mechanician came when I was away; I haven’t
seen him yet,’ he said, not looking at her.
He went downstairs, but before he had time to leave
his study he heard his wife’s familiar footsteps running
with reckless speed to him.
‘What do you want?’ he said to her shortly. ‘We are
busy.’
‘I beg your pardon,’ she said to the German
mechanician; ‘I want a few words with my husband.’
The German would have left the room, but Levin said
to him:
‘Don’t disturb yourself.’
‘The train is at three?’ queried the German. ‘I mustn’t
be late.’
Levin did not answer him, but walked out himself with
his wife.
‘Well, what have you to say to me?’ he said to her in
French.
Anna Karenina
1299 of 1759
He did not look her in the face, and did not care to see
that she in her condition was trembling all over, and had a
piteous, crushed look.
‘I...I want to say that we can’t go on like this; that this
is misery...’ she said.
‘The servants are here at the sideboard,’ he said angrily;
‘don’t make a scene.’
‘Well, let’s go in here!’
They were standing in the passage. Kitty would have
gone into the next room, but there the English governess
was giving Tanya a lesson.
‘Well, come into the garden.’
In the garden they came upon a peasant weeding the
path. And no longer considering that the peasant could see
her tear-stained and his agitated face, that they looked like
people fleeing from some disaster, they went on with rapid
steps, feeling that they must speak out and clear up
misunderstandings, must be alone together, and so get rid
of the misery they were both feeling.
‘We can’t go on like this! It’s misery! I am wretched;
you are wretched. What for?’ she said, when they had at
last reached a solitary garden seat at a turn in the lime tree
avenue.
Anna Karenina
1300 of 1759
‘But tell me one thing: was there in his tone anything
unseemly, not nice, humiliatingly horrible?’ he said,
standing before her again in the same position with his
clenched fists on his chest, as he had stood before her that
night.
‘Yes,’ she said in a shaking voice; ‘but, Kostya, surely
you see I’m not to blame? All the morning I’ve been
trying to take a tone...but such people ...Why did he
come? How happy we were!’ she said, breathless with the
sobs that shook her.
Although nothing had been pursuing them, and there
was nothing to run away from, and they could not
possibly have found anything very delightful on that
garden seat, the gardener saw with astonishment that they
passed him on their way home with comforted and radiant
faces.
Anna Karenina
1301 of 1759
Chapter 15
After escorting his wife upstairs, Levin went to Dolly’s
part of the house. Darya Alexandrovna, for her part, was
in great distress too that day. She was walking about the
room, talking angrily to a little girl, who stood in the
corner roaring.
‘And you shall stand all day in the corner, and have
your dinner all alone, and not see one of your dolls, and I
won’t make you a new frock,’ she said, not knowing how
to punish her.
‘Oh, she is a disgusting child!’ she turned to Levin.
‘Where does she get such wicked propensities?’
‘Why, what has she done?’ Levin said without much
interest, for he had wanted to ask her advice, and so was
annoyed that he had come at an unlucky moment.
‘Grisha and she went into the raspberries, and there...I
can’t tell you really what she did. It’s a thousand pities
Miss Elliot’s not with us. This one sees to nothing—she’s a
machine.... Figurez-vous que la petite?..’
And Darya Alexandrovna described Masha’s crime.
‘That proves nothing; it’s not a question of evil
propensities at all, it’s simply mischief,’ Levin assured her.
Anna Karenina
1302 of 1759
‘But you are upset about something? What have you
come for?’ asked Dolly. ‘What’s going on there?’
And in the tone of her question Levin heard that it
would be easy for him to say what he had meant to say.
‘I’ve not been in there, I’ve been alone in the garden
with Kitty. We’ve had a quarrel for the second time
since...Stiva came.’
Dolly looked at him with her shrewd, comprehending
eyes.
‘Come, tell me, honor bright, has there been...not in
Kitty, but in that gentleman’s behavior, a tone which
might be unpleasant— not unpleasant, but horrible,
offensive to a husband?’
‘You mean, how shall I say.... Stay, stay in the corner!’
she said to Masha, who, detecting a faint smile in her
mother’s face, had been turning round. ‘The opinion of
the world would be that he is behaving as young men do
behave. Il fait la cour a une jeune et jolie femme, and a
husband who’s a man of the world should only be flattered
by it.’
‘Yes, yes,’ said Levin gloomily; ‘but you noticed it?’
‘Not only I, but Stiva noticed it. Just after breakfast he
said to me in so many words, Je crois que Veslovsky fait
un petit brin de cour a Kitty.’
Anna Karenina
1303 of 1759
‘Well, that’s all right then; now I’m satisfied. I’ll send
him away,’ said Levin.
‘What do you mean!b Are you crazy?’ Dolly cried in
horror; ‘nonsense, Kostya, only think!’ she said, laughing.
‘You can go now to Fanny,’ she said to Masha. ‘No, if
you wish it, I’ll speak to Stiva. He’ll take him away. He
can say you’re expecting visitors. Altogether he doesn’t fit
into the house.’
‘No, no, I’ll do it myself.’
‘But you’ll quarrel with him?’
‘Not a bit. I shall so enjoy it,’ Levin said, his eyes
flashing with real enjoyment. ‘Come, forgive her, Dolly,
she won’t do it again,’ he said of the little sinner, who had
not gone to Fanny, but was standing irresolutely before
her mother, waiting and looking up from under her brows
to catch her mother’s eye.
The mother glanced at her. The child broke into sobs,
hid her face on her mother’s lap, and Dolly laid her thin,
tender hand on her head.
‘And what is there in common between us and him?’
thought Levin, and he went off to look for Veslovsky.
As he passed through the passage he gave orders for the
carriage to be got ready to drive to the station.
‘The spring was broken yesterday,’ said the footman.
Anna Karenina
1304 of 1759
‘Well, the covered trap, then, and make haste. Where’s
the visitor?’
‘The gentleman’s gone to his room.’
Levin came upon Veslovsky at the moment when the
latter, having unpacked his things from his trunk, and laid
out some new songs, was putting on his gaiters to go out
riding.
Whether there was something exceptional in Levin’s
face, or that Vassenka was himself conscious that ce petit
brin de cour he was making was out of place in this
family, but he was somewhat (as much as a young man in
society can be) disconcerted at Levin’s entrance.
‘You ride in gaiters?’
‘Yes, it’s much cleaner,’ said Vassenka, putting his fat
leg on a chair, fastening the bottom hook, and smiling
with simple-hearted good humor.
He was undoubtedly a good-natured fellow, and Levin
felt sorry for him and ashamed of himself, as his host,
when he saw the shy look on Vassenka’s face.
On the table lay a piece of stick which they had broken
together that morning, trying their strength. Levin took
the fragment in his hands and began smashing it up,
breaking bits off the stick, not knowing how to begin.
Anna Karenina
1305 of 1759
‘I wanted....’ He paused, but suddenly, remembering
Kitty and everything that had happened, he said, looking
him resolutely in the face: ‘I have ordered the horses to be
put-to for you.’
‘How so?’ Vassenka began in surprise. ‘To drive
where?’
‘For you to drive to the station,’ Levin said gloomily.
‘Are you going away, or has something happened?’
‘It happens that I expect visitors,’ said Levin, his strong
fingers more and more rapidly breaking off the ends of the
split stick. ‘And I’m not expecting visitors, and nothing has
happened, but I beg you to go away. You can explain my
rudeness as you like.’
Vassenka drew himself up.
‘I beg you to explain...’ he said with dignity,
understanding at last.
‘I can’t explain,’ Levin said softly and deliberately,
trying to control the trembling of his jaw; ‘and you’d
better not ask.’
And as the split ends were all broken off, Levin
clutched the thick ends in his finger, broke the stick in
two, and carefully caught the end as it fell.
Probably the sight of those nervous fingers, of the
muscles he had proved that morning at gymnastics, of the
Anna Karenina
1306 of 1759
glittering eyes, the soft voice, and quivering jaws,
convinced Vassenka better than any words. He bowed,
shrugging his shoulders, and smiling contemptuously.
‘Can I not see Oblonsky?’
The shrug and the smile did not irritate Levin.
‘What else was there for him to do?’ he thought.
‘I’ll send him to you at once.’
‘What madness is this?’ Stepan Arkadyevitch said when,
after hearing from his friend that he was being turned out
of the house, he found Levin in the garden, where he was
walking about waiting for his guest’s departure. ‘Mais c’est
ridicule! What fly has stung you? Mais c’est du dernier
ridicule! What did you think, if a young man..’
But the place where Levin had been stung was
evidently still sore, for he turned pale again, when Stepan
Arkadyevitch would have enlarged on the reason, and he
himself cut him short.
‘Please don’t go into it! I can’t help it. I feel ashamed of
how I’m treating you and him. But it won’t be, I imagine,
a great grief to him to go, and his presence was distasteful
to me and to my wife.’
‘But it’s insulting to him! Et puis c’est ridicule.’
Anna Karenina
1307 of 1759
‘And to me it’s both insulting and distressing! And I’m
not at fault in any way, and there’s no need for me to
suffer.’
‘Well, this I didn’t expect of you! On peut etre jaloux,
mais a ce point, c’est du dernier ridicule!’
Levin turned quickly, and walked away from him into
the depths of the avenue, and he went on walking up and
down alone. Soon he heard the rumble of the trap, and
saw from behind the trees how Vassenka, sitting in the hay
(unluckily there was no seat in the trap) in his Scotch cap,
was driven along the avenue, jolting up and down over
the ruts.
‘What’s this?’ Levin thought, when a footman ran out
of the house and stopped the trap. It was the mechanician,
whom Levin had totally forgotten. The mechanician,
bowing low, said something to Veslovsky, then clambered
into the trap, and they drove off together.
Stepan Arkadyevitch and the princess were much upset
by Levin’s action. And he himself felt not only in the
highest degree ridicule, but also utterly guilty and
disgraced. But remembering what sufferings he and his
wife had been through, when he asked himself how he
should act another time, he answered that he should do
just the same again.
Anna Karenina
1308 of 1759
In spite of all this, towards the end of that day,
everyone except the princess, who could not pardon
Levin’s action, became extraordinarily lively and good
humored, like children after a punishment or grown-up
people after a dreary, ceremonious reception, so that by
the evening Vassenka’s dismissal was spoken of, in the
absence of the princess, as though it were some remote
event. And Dolly, who had inherited her father’s gift of
humorous storytelling, made Varenka helpless with
laughter as she related for the third and fourth time, always
with fresh humorous additions, how she had only just put
on her new shoes for the benefit of the visitor, and on
going into the drawing room, heard suddenly the rumble
of the trap. And who should be in the trap but Vassenka
himself, with his Scotch cap, and his songs and his gaiters,
and all, sitting in the hay.
‘If only you’d ordered out the carriage! But no! and
then I hear: ‘Stop!’ Oh, I thought they’ve relented. I look
out, and behold a fat German being sat down by him and
driving away.... And my new shoes all for nothing!..’
Anna Karenina
1309 of 1759
Chapter 16
Darya Alexandrovna carried out her intention and went
to see Anna. She was sorry to annoy her sister and to do
anything Levin disliked. She quite understood how right
the Levins were in not wishing to have anything to do
with Vronsky. But she felt she must go and see Anna, and
show her that her feelings could not be changed, in spite
of the change in her position. That she might be
independent of the Levins in this expedition, Darya
Alexandrovna sent to the village to hire horses for the
drive; but Levin learning of it went to her to protest.
‘What makes you suppose that I dislike your going?
But, even if I did dislike it, I should still more dislike your
not taking my horses,’ he said. ‘You never told me that
you were going for certain. Hiring horses in the village is
disagreeable to me, and, what’s of more importance,
they’ll undertake the job and never get you there. I have
horses. And if you don’t want to wound me, you’ll take
mine.’
Darya Alexandrovna had to consent, and on the day
fixed Levin had ready for his sister-in-law a set of four
horses and relays, getting them together from the farm-
Anna Karenina
1310 of 1759
and saddle-horses—not at all a smart-looking set, but
capable of taking Darya Alexandrovna the whole distance
in a single day. At that moment, when horses were wanted
for the princess, who was going, and for the midwife, it
was a difficult matter for Levin to make up the number,
but the duties of hospitality would not let him allow Darya
Alexandrovna to hire horses when staying in his house.
Moreover, he was well aware that the twenty roubles that
would be asked for the journey were a serious matter for
her; Darya Alexandrovna’s pecuniary affairs, which were
in a very unsatisfactory state, were taken to heart by the
Levins as if they were their own.
Darya Alexandrovna, by Levin’s advice, started before
daybreak. The road was good, the carriage comfortable,
the horses trotted along merrily, and on the box, besides
the coachman, sat the counting-house clerk, whom Levin
was sending instead of a groom for greater security. Darya
Alexandrovna dozed and waked up only on reaching the
inn where the horses were to be changed.
After drinking tea at the same well-to-do peasant’s with
whom Levin had stayed on the way to Sviazhsky’s, and
chatting with the women about their children, and with
the old man about Count Vronsky, whom the latter
praised very highly, Darya Alexandrovna, at ten o’clock,
Anna Karenina
1311 of 1759
went on again. At home, looking after her children, she
had no time to think. So now, after this journey of four
hours, all the thoughts she had suppressed before rushed
swarming into her brain, and she thought over all her life
as she never had before, and from the most different points
of view. Her thoughts seemed strange even to herself. At
first she thought about the children, about whom she was
uneasy, although the princess and Kitty (she reckoned
more upon her) had promised to look after them. ‘If only
Masha does not begin her naughty tricks, if Grisha isn’t
kicked by a horse, and Lily’s stomach isn’t upset again!’
she thought. But these questions of the present were
succeeded by questions of the immediate future. She
began thinking how she had to get a new flat in Moscow
for the coming winter, to renew the drawing room
furniture, and to make her elder girl a cloak. Then
questions of the more remote future occurred to her: how
she was to place her children in the world. ‘The girls are
all right,’ she thought; ‘but the boys?’
‘It’s very well that I’m teaching Grisha, but of course
that’s only because I am free myself now, I’m not with
child. Stiva, of course, there’s no counting on. And with
the help of good-natured friends I can bring them up; but
if there’s another baby coming?...’ And the thought struck
Anna Karenina
1312 of 1759
her how untruly it was said that the curse laid on woman
was that in sorrow she should bring forth children.
‘The birth itself, that’s nothing; but the months of
carrying the child—that’s what’s so intolerable,’ she
thought, picturing to herself her last pregnancy, and the
death of the last baby. And she recalled the conversation
she had just had with the young woman at the inn. On
being asked whether she had any children, the handsome
young woman had answered cheerfully:
‘I had a girl baby, but God set me free; I buried her last
Lent.’
‘Well, did you grieve very much for her?’ asked Darya
Alexandrovna.
‘Why grieve? The old man has grandchildren enough
as it is. It was only a trouble. No working, nor nothing.
Only a tie.’
This answer had struck Darya Alexandrovna as
revolting in spite of the good-natured and pleasing face of
the young woman; but now she could not help recalling
these words. In those cynical words there was indeed a
grain of truth.
‘Yes, altogether,’ thought Darya Alexandrovna, looking
back over her whole existence during those fifteen years of
her married life, ‘pregnancy, sickness, mental incapacity,
Anna Karenina
1313 of 1759
indifference to everything, and most of all—hideousness.
Kitty, young and pretty as she is, even Kitty has lost her
looks; and I when I’m with child become hideous, I know
it. The birth, the agony, the hideous agonies, that last
moment...then the nursing, the sleepless nights, the fearful
pains...’
Darya Alexandrovna shuddered at the mere recollection
of the pain from sore breasts which she had suffered with
almost every child. ‘Then the children’s illnesses, that
everlasting apprehension; then bringing them up; evil
propensities’ (she thought of little Masha’s crime among
the raspberries), ‘education, Latin—it’s all so
incomprehensible and difficult. And on the top of it all,
the death of these children.’ And there rose again before
her imagination the cruel memory, that always tore her
mother’s heart, of the death of her last little baby, who had
died of croup; his funeral, the callous indifference of all at
the little pink coffin, and her own torn heart, and her
lonely anguish at the sight of the pale little brow with its
projecting temples, and the open, wondering little mouth
seen in the coffin at the moment when it was being
covered with the little pink lid with a cross braided on it.
‘And all this, what’s it for? What is to come of it all?
That I’m wasting my life, never having a moment’s peace,
Anna Karenina
1314 of 1759
either with child, or nursing a child, forever irritable,
peevish, wretched myself and worrying others, repulsive to
my husband, while the children are growing up unhappy,
badly educated, and penniless. Even now, if it weren’t for
spending the summer at the Levins’, I don’t know how we
should be managing to live. Of course Kostya and Kitty
have so much tact that we don’t feel it; but it can’t go on.
They’ll have children, they won’t be able to keep us; it’s a
drag on them as it is. How is papa, who has hardly
anything left for himself, to help us? So that I can’t even
bring the children up by myself, and may find it hard with
the help of other people, at the cost of humiliation. Why,
even if we suppose the greatest good luck, that the
children don’t die, and I bring them up somehow. At the
very best they’ll simply be decent people. That’s all I can
hope for. And to gain simply that—what agonies, what
toil!... One’s whole life ruined!’ Again she recalled what
the young peasant woman had said, and again she was
revolted at the thought; but she could not help admitting
that there was a grain of brutal truth in the words.
‘Is it far now, Mihail?’ Darya Alexandrovna asked the
counting house clerk, to turn her mind from thoughts that
were frightening her.
Anna Karenina
1315 of 1759
‘From this village, they say, it’s five miles.’ The carriage
drove along the village street and onto a bridge. On the
bridge was a crowd of peasant women with coils of ties for
the sheaves on their shoulders, gaily and noisily chattering.
They stood still on the bridge, staring inquisitively at the
carriage. All the faces turned to Darya Alexandrovna
looked to her healthy and happy, making her envious of
their enjoyment of life. ‘They’re all living, they’re all
enjoying life,’ Darya Alexandrovna still mused when she
had passed the peasant women and was driving uphill
again at a trot, seated comfortably on the soft springs of
the old carriage, ‘while I, let out, as it were from prison,
from the world of worries that fret me to death, am only
looking about me now for an instant. They all live; those
peasant women and my sister Natalia and Varenka and
Anna, whom I am going to see—all, but not I.
‘And they attack Anna. What for? am I any better? I
have, anyway, a husband I love—not as I should like to
love him, still I do love him, while Anna never loved hers.
How is she to blame? She wants to live. God has put that
in our hearts. Very likely I should have done the same.
Even to this day I don’t feel sure I did right in listening to
her at that terrible time when she came to me in Moscow.
I ought then to have cast off my husband and have begun
Anna Karenina
1316 of 1759
my life fresh. I might have loved and have been loved in
reality. And is it any better as it is? I don’t respect him.
He’s necessary to me,’ she thought about her husband,
‘and I put up with him. Is that any better? At that time I
could still have been admired, I had beauty left me still,’
Darya Alexandrovna pursued her thoughts, and she would
have liked to look at herself in the looking glass. She had a
traveling looking glass in her handbag, and she wanted to
take it out; but looking at the backs of the coachman and
the swaying counting house clerk, she felt that she would
be ashamed if either of them were to look round, and she
did not take out the glass.
But without looking in the glass, she thought that even
now it was not too late; and she thought of Sergey
Ivanovitch, who was always particularly attentive to her,
of Stiva’s good-hearted friend, Turovtsin, who had helped
her nurse her children through the scarlatina, and was in
love with her. And there was someone else, a quite young
man, who—her husband had told her it as a joke—
thought her more beautiful than either of her sisters. And
the most passionate and impossible romances rose before
Darya Alexandrovna’s imagination. ‘Anna did quite right,
and certainly I shall never reproach her for it. She is
happy, she makes another person happy, and she’s not
Anna Karenina
1317 of 1759
broken down as I am, but most likely just as she always
was, bright, clever, open to every impression,’ thought
Darya Alexandrovna,—and a sly smile curved her lips, for,
as she pondered on Anna’s love affair, Darya Alexandrovna
constructed on parallel lines an almost identical love affair
for herself, with an imaginary composite figure, the ideal
man who was in love with her. She, like Anna, confessed
the whole affair to her husband. And the amazement and
perplexity of Stepan Arkadyevitch at this avowal made her
smile.
In such daydreams she reached the turning of the
highroad that led to Vozdvizhenskoe.
Anna Karenina
1318 of 1759
Chapter 17
The coachman pulled up his four horses and looked
round to the right, to a field of rye, where some peasants
were sitting on a cart. The counting house clerk was just
going to jump down, but on second thoughts he shouted
peremptorily to the peasants instead, and beckoned to
them to come up. The wind, that seemed to blow as they
drove, dropped when the carriage stood still; gadflies
settled on the steaming horses that angrily shook them off.
The metallic clank of a whetstone against a scythe, that
came to them from the cart, ceased. One of the peasants
got up and came towards the carriage.
‘Well, you are slow!’ the counting house clerk shouted
angrily to the peasant who was stepping slowly with his
bare feet over the ruts of the rough dry road. ‘Come
along, do!’
A curly-headed old man with a bit of bast tied round
his hair, and his bent back dark with perspiration, came
towards the carriage, quickening his steps, and took hold
of the mud-guard with his sunburnt hand.
‘Vozdvizhenskoe, the manor house? the count’s?’ he
repeated; ‘go on to the end of this track. Then turn to the
Anna Karenina
1319 of 1759
left. Straight along the avenue and you’ll come right upon
it. But whom do you want? The count himself?’
‘Well, are they at home, my good man?’ Darya
Alexandrovna said vaguely, not knowing how to ask about
Anna, even of this peasant.
‘At home for sure,’ said the peasant, shifting from one
bare foot to the other, and leaving a distinct print of five
toes and a heel in the dust. ‘Sure to be at home,’ he
repeated, evidently eager to talk. ‘Only yesterday visitors
arrived. There’s a sight of visitors come. What do you
want?’ He turned round and called to a lad, who was
shouting something to him from the cart. ‘Oh! They all
rode by here not long since, to look at a reaping machine.
They’ll be home by now. And who will you be belonging
to?..’
‘We’ve come a long way,’ said the coachman, climbing
onto the box. ‘So it’s not far?’
‘I tell you, it’s just here. As soon as you get out...’ he
said, keeping hold all the while of the carriage.
A healthy-looking, broad-shouldered young fellow
came up too.
‘What, is it laborers they want for the harvest?’ he
asked.
‘I don’t know, my boy.’
Anna Karenina
1320 of 1759
‘So you keep to the left, and you’ll come right on it,’
said the peasant, unmistakably loth to let the travelers go,
and eager to converse.
The coachman started the horses, but they were only
just turning off when the peasant shouted: ‘Stop! Hi,
friend! Stop!’ called the two voices. The coachman
stopped.
‘They’re coming! They’re yonder!’ shouted the
peasant. ‘See what a turn-out!’ he said, pointing to four
persons on horseback, and two in a char-a-banc, coming
along the road.
They were Vronsky with a jockey, Veslovsky and Anna
on horseback, and Princess Varvara and Sviazhsky in the
char-a-banc. They had gone out to look at the working of
a new reaping machine.
When the carriage stopped, the party on horseback
were coming at a walking pace. Anna was in front beside
Veslovsky. Anna, quietly walking her horse, a sturdy
English cob with cropped mane and short tail, her
beautiful head with her black hair straying loose under her
high hat, her full shoulders, her slender waist in her black
riding habit, and all the ease and grace of her deportment,
impressed Dolly.
Anna Karenina
1321 of 1759
For the first minute it seemed to her unsuitable for
Anna to be on horseback. The conception of riding on
horseback for a lady was, in Darya Alexandrovna’s mind,
associated with ideas of youthful flirtation and frivolity,
which, in her opinion, was unbecoming in Anna’s
position. But when she had scrutinized her, seeing her
closer, she was at once reconciled to her riding. In spite of
her elegance, everything was so simple, quiet, and
dignified in the attitude, the dress and the movements of
Anna, that nothing could have been more natural.
Beside Anna, on a hot-looking gray cavalry horse, was
Vassenka Veslovsky in his Scotch cap with floating
ribbons, his stout legs stretched out in front, obviously
pleased with his own appearance. Darya Alexandrovna
could not suppress a good-humored smile as she
recognized him. Behind rode Vronsky on a dark bay mare,
obviously heated from galloping. He was holding her in,
pulling at the reins.
After him rode a little man in the dress of a jockey.
Sviazhsky and Princess Varvara in a new char-a-banc with
a big, raven-black trotting horse, overtook the party on
horseback.
Anna’s face suddenly beamed with a joyful smile at the
instant when, in the little figure huddled in a corner of the
Anna Karenina
1322 of 1759
old carriage, she recognized Dolly. She uttered a cry,
started in the saddle, and set her horse into a gallop. On
reaching the carriage she jumped off without assistance,
and holding up her riding habit, she ran up to greet Dolly.
‘I thought it was you and dared not think it. How
delightful! You can’t fancy how glad I am!’ she said, at one
moment pressing her face against Dolly and kissing her,
and at the next holding her off and examining her with a
smile.
‘Here’s a delightful surprise, Alexey!’ she said, looking
round at Vronsky, who had dismounted, and was walking
towards them.
Vronsky, taking off his tall gray hat, went up to Dolly.
‘You wouldn’t believe how glad we are to see you,’ he
said, giving peculiar significance to the words, and
showing his strong white teeth in a smile.
Vassenka Veslovsky, without getting off his horse, took
off his cap and greeted the visitor by gleefully waving the
ribbons over his head.
‘That’s Princess Varvara,’ Anna said in reply to a glance
of inquiry from Dolly as the char-a-banc drove up.
‘Ah!’ said Darya Alexandrovna, and unconsciously her
face betrayed her dissatisfaction.
Anna Karenina
1323 of 1759
Princess Varvara was her husband’s aunt, and she had
long known her, and did not respect her. She knew that
Princess Varvara had passed her whole life toadying on her
rich relations, but that she should now be sponging on
Vronsky, a man who was nothing to her, mortified Dolly
on account of her kinship with her husband. Anna noticed
Dolly’s expression, and was disconcerted by it. She
blushed, dropped her riding habit, and stumbled over it.
Darya Alexandrovna went up to the char-a-banc and
coldly greeted Princess Varvara. Sviazhsky too she knew.
He inquired how his queer friend with the young wife
was, and running his eyes over the ill-matched horses and
the carriage with its patched mud-guards, proposed to the
ladies that they should get into the char-a-banc.
‘And I’ll get into this vehicle,’ he said. ‘The horse is
quiet, and the princess drives capitally.’
‘No, stay as you were,’ said Anna, coming up, ‘and
we’ll go in the carriage,’ and taking Dolly’s arm, she drew
her away.
Darya Alexandrovna’s eyes were fairly dazzled by the
elegant carriage of a pattern she had never seen before, the
splendid horses, and the elegant and gorgeous people
surrounding her. But what struck her most of all was the
change that had taken place in Anna, whom she knew so
Anna Karenina
1324 of 1759
well and loved. Any other woman, a less close observer,
not knowing Anna before, or not having thought as Darya
Alexandrovna had been thinking on the road, would not
have noticed anything special in Anna. But now Dolly was
struck by that temporary beauty, which is only found in
women during the moments of love, and which she saw
now in Anna’s face. Everything in her face, the clearly
marked dimples in her cheeks and chin, the line of her
lips, the smile which, as it were, fluttered about her face,
the brilliance of her eyes, the grace and rapidity of her
move meets, the fulness of the notes of her voice, even the
manner in which, with a sort of angry friendliness, she
answered Veslovsky when he asked permission to get on
her cob, so as to teach it to gallop with the right leg
foremost—it was all peculiarly fascinating, and it seemed as
if she were herself aware of it, and rejoicing in it.
When both the women were seated in the carriage, a
sudden embarrassment came over both of them. Anna was
disconcerted by the intent look of inquiry Dolly fixed
upon her. Dolly was embarrassed because after Sviazhsky’s
phrase about ‘this vehicle,’ she could not help feeling
ashamed of the dirty old carriage in which Anna was
sitting with her. The coachman Philip and the counting
house clerk were experiencing the same sensation. The
Anna Karenina
1325 of 1759
counting house clerk, to conceal his confusion, busied
himself settling the ladies, but Philip the coachman
became sullen, and was bracing himself not to be
overawed in future by this external superiority. He smiled
ironically, looking at the raven horse, and was already
deciding in his own mind that this smart trotter in the
char-a-banc was only good for promenage, and wouldn’t
do thirty miles straight off in the heat.
The peasants had all got up from the cart and were
inquisitively and mirthfully staring at the meeting of the
friends, making their comments on it.
‘They’re pleased, too; haven’t seen each other for a
long while,’ said the curly-headed old man with the bast
round his hair.
‘I say, Uncle Gerasim, if we could take that raven horse
now, to cart the corn, that ‘ud be quick work!’
‘Look-ee! Is that a woman in breeches?’ said one of
them, pointing to Vassenka Veslovsky sitting in a side
saddle.
‘Nay, a man! See how smartly he’s going it!’
‘Eh, lads! seems we’re not going to sleep, then?’
‘What chance of sleep today!’ said the old man, with a
sidelong look at the sun. ‘Midday’s past, look-ee! Get your
hooks, and come along!’
Chapter 18
Anna looked at Dolly’s thin, care-worn face, with its
wrinkles filled with dust from the road, and she was on the
point of saying what she was thinking, that is, that Dolly
had got thinner. But, conscious that she herself had grown
handsomer, and that Dolly’s eyes were telling her so, she
sighed and began to speak about herself.
‘You are looking at me,’ she said, ‘and wondering how
I can be happy in my position? Well! it’s shameful to
confess, but I... I’m inexcusably happy. Something magical
has happened to me, like a dream, when you’re
frightened, panic-stricken, and all of a sudden you wake
up and all the horrors are no more. I have waked up. I
have lived through the misery, the dread, and now for a
long while past, especially since we’ve been here, I’ve
been so happy!...’ she said, with a timid smile of inquiry
looking at Dolly.
‘How glad I am!’ said Dolly smiling, involuntarily
speaking more coldly than she wanted to. ‘I’m very glad
for you. Why haven’t you written to me?’
‘Why?... Because I hadn’t the courage.... You forget
my position..’
Anna Karenina
1327 of 1759
‘To me? Hadn’t the courage? If you knew how I...I
look at..’
Darya Alexandrovna wanted to express her thoughts of
the morning, but for some reason it seemed to her now
out of place to do so.
‘But of that we’ll talk later. What’s this, what are all
these buildings?’ she asked, wanting to change the
conversation and pointing to the red and green roofs that
came into view behind the green hedges of acacia and
lilac. ‘Quite a little town.’
But Anna did not answer.
‘No, no! How do you look at my position, what do
you think of it?’ she asked.
‘I consider...’ Darya Alexandrovna was beginning, but
at that instant Vassenka Veslovsky, having brought the cob
to gallop with the right leg foremost, galloped past them,
bumping heavily up and down in his short jacket on the
chamois leather of the side saddle. ‘He’s doing it, Anna
Arkadyevna!’ he shouted.
Anna did not even glance at him; but again it seemed
to Darya Alexandrovna out of place to enter upon such a
long conversation in the carriage, and so she cut short her
thought.
Anna Karenina
1328 of 1759
‘I don’t think anything,’ she said, ‘but I always loved
you, and if one loves anyone, one loves the whole person,
just as they are and not as one would like them to be...’
Anna, taking her eyes off her friend’s face and dropping
her eyelids (this was a new habit Dolly had not seen in her
before), pondered, trying to penetrate the full significance
of the words. And obviously interpreting them as she
would have wished, she glanced at Dolly.
‘If you had any sins,’ she said, ‘they would all be
forgiven you for your coming to see me and these words.’
And Dolly saw that tears stood in her eyes. She pressed
Anna’s hand in silence.
‘Well, what are these buildings? How many there are of
them!’ After a moment’s silence she repeated her question.
‘These are the servants’ houses, barns, and stables,’
answered Anna. ‘And there the park begins. It had all gone
to ruin, but Alexey had everything renewed. He is very
fond of this place, and, what I never expected, he has
become intensely interested in looking after it. But his is
such a rich nature! Whatever he takes up, he does
splendidly. So far from being bored by it, he works with
passionate interest. He—with his temperament as I know
it—he has become careful and businesslike, a first-rate
manager, he positively reckons every penny in his
Anna Karenina
1329 of 1759
management of the land. But only in that. When it’s a
question of tens of thousands, he doesn’t think of money.’
She spoke with that gleefully sly smile with which women
often talk of the secret characteristics only known to
them—of those they love. ‘Do you see that big building?
that’s the new hospital. I believe it will cost over a
hundred thousand; that’s his hobby just now. And do you
know how it all came about? The peasants asked him for
some meadowland, I think it was, at a cheaper rate, and he
refused, and I accused him of being miserly. Of course it
was not really because of that, but everything together, he
began this hospital to prove, do you see, that he was not
miserly about money. C’est une petitesse, if you like, but I
love him all the more for it. And now you’ll see the house
in a moment. It was his grandfather’s house, and he has
had nothing changed outside.’
‘How beautiful!’ said Dolly, looking with involuntary
admiration at the handsome house with columns, standing
out among the different-colored greens of the old trees in
the garden.
‘Isn’t it fine? And from the house, from the top, the
view is wonderful.’
They drove into a courtyard strewn with gravel and
bright with flowers, in which two laborers were at work
Anna Karenina
1330 of 1759
putting an edging of stones round the light mould of a
flower bed, and drew up in a covered entry.
‘Ah, they’re here already!’ said Anna, looking at the
saddle horses, which were just being led away from the
steps. ‘It is a nice horse, isn’t it? It’s my cob; my favorite.
Lead him here and bring me some sugar. Where is the
count?’ she inquired of two smart footmen who darted
out. ‘Ah, there he is!’ she said, seeing Vronsky coming to
meet her with Veslovsky.
‘Where are you going to put the princess?’ said
Vronsky in French, addressing Anna, and without waiting
for a reply, he once more greeted Darya Alexandrovna,
and this time he kissed her hand. ‘I think the big balcony
room.’
‘Oh, no, that’s too far off! Better in the corner room,
we shall see each other more. Come, let’s go up,’ said
Anna, as she gave her favorite horse the sugar the footman
had brought her.
‘Et vous oubliez votre devoir,’ she said to Veslovsky,
who came out too on the steps.
‘Pardon, j’en ai tout plein les poches,’ he answered,
smiling, putting his fingers in his waistcoat pocket.
Anna Karenina
1331 of 1759
‘Mais vous venez trop tard,’ she said, rubbing her
handkerchief on her hand, which the horse had made wet
in taking the sugar.
Anna turned to Dolly. ‘You can stay some time? For
one day only? That’s impossible!’
‘I promised to be back, and the children...’ said Dolly,
feeling embarrassed both because she had to get her bag
out of the carriage, and because she knew her face must be
covered with dust.
‘No, Dolly, darling!... Well, we’ll see. Come along,
come along!’ and Anna led Dolly to her room.
That room was not the smart guest chamber Vronsky
had suggested, but the one of which Anna had said that
Dolly would excuse it. And this room, for which excuse
was needed, was more full of luxury than any in which
Dolly had ever stayed, a luxury that reminded her of the
best hotels abroad.
‘Well, darling, how happy I am!’ Anna said, sitting
down in her riding habit for a moment beside Dolly. ‘Tell
me about all of you. Stiva I had only a glimpse of, and he
cannot tell one about the children. How is my favorite,
Tanya? Quite a big girl, I expect?’
‘Yes, she’s very tall,’ Darya Alexandrovna answered
shortly, surprised herself that she should respond so coolly
Anna Karenina
1332 of 1759
about her children. ‘We are having a delightful stay at the
Levins’,’ she added.
‘Oh, if I had known,’ said Anna, ‘that you do not
despise me!... You might have all come to us. Stiva’s an
old friend and a great friend of Alexey’s, you know,’ she
added, and suddenly she blushed.
‘Yes, but we are all...’ Dolly answered in confusion.
‘But in my delight I’m talking nonsense. The one
thing, darling, is that I am so glad to have you!’ said Anna,
kissing her again. ‘You haven’t told me yet how and what
you think about me, and I keep wanting to know. But I’m
glad you will see me as I am. The chief thing I shouldn’t
like would be for people to imagine I want to prove
anything. I don’t want to prove anything; I merely want
to live, to do no one harm but myself. I have the right to
do that, haven’t I? But it is a big subject, and we’ll talk
over everything properly later. Now I’ll go and dress and
send a maid to you.’
Anna Karenina
1333 of 1759
Chapter 19
Left alone, Darya Alexandrovna, with a good
housewife’s eye, scanned her room. All she had seen in
entering the house and walking through it, and all she saw
now in her room, gave her an impression of wealth and
sumptuousness and of that modern European luxury of
which she had only read in English novels, but had never
seen in Russia and in the country. Everything was new
from the new French hangings on the walls to the carpet
which covered the whole floor. The bed had a spring
mattress, and a special sort of bolster and silk pillowcases
on the little pillows. The marble washstand, the dressing
table, the little sofa, the tables, the bronze clock on the
chimney piece, the window curtains, and the portieres
were all new and expensive.
The smart maid, who came in to offer her services,
with her hair done up high, and a gown more fashionable
than Dolly’s, was as new and expensive as the whole
room. Darya Alexandrovna liked her neatness, her
deferential and obliging manners, but she felt ill at ease
with her. She felt ashamed of her seeing the patched
dressing jacket that had unluckily been packed by mistake
Anna Karenina
1334 of 1759
for her. She was ashamed of the very patches and darned
places of which she had been so proud at home. At home
it had been so clear that for six dressing jackets there
would be needed twenty-four yards of nainsook at sixteen
pence the yard, which was a matter of thirty shillings
besides the cutting-out and making, and these thirty
shillings had been saved. But before the maid she felt, if
not exactly ashamed, at least uncomfortable.
Darya Alexandrovna had a great sense of relief when
Annushka, whom she had known for years, walked in.
The smart maid was sent for to go to her mistress, and
Annushka remained with Darya Alexandrovna.
Annushka was obviously much pleased at that lady’s
arrival, and began to chatter away without a pause. Dolly
observed that she was longing to express her opinion in
regard to her mistress’s position, especially as to the love
and devotion of the count to Anna Arkadyevna, but Dolly
carefully interrupted her whenever she began to speak
about this.
‘I grew up with Anna Arkadyevna; my lady’s dearer to
me than anything. Well, it’s not for us to judge. And, to
be sure, there seems so much love..’
‘Kindly pour out the water for me to wash now,
please,’ Darya Alexandrovna cut her short.
Anna Karenina
1335 of 1759
‘Certainly. We’ve two women kept specially for
washing small things, but most of the linen’s done by
machinery. The count goes into everything himself. Ah,
what a husband!..’
Dolly was glad when Anna came in, and by her
entrance put a stop to Annushka’s gossip.
Anna had put on a very simple batiste gown. Dolly
scrutinized that simple gown attentively. She knew what it
meant, and the price at which such simplicity was
obtained.
‘An old friend,’ said Anna of Annushka.
Anna was not embarrassed now. She was perfectly
composed and at ease. Dolly saw that she had now
completely recovered from the impression her arrival had
made on her, and had assumed that superficial, careless
tone which, as it were, closed the door on that
compartment in which her deeper feelings and ideas were
kept.
‘Well, Anna, and how is your little girl?’ asked Dolly.
‘Annie?’ (This was what she called her little daughter
Anna.) ‘Very well. She has got on wonderfully. Would
you like to see her? Come, I’ll show her to you. We had a
terrible bother,’ she began telling her, ‘over nurses. We
had an Italian wet-nurse. A good creature, but so stupid!
Anna Karenina
1336 of 1759
We wanted to get rid of her, but the baby is so used to her
that we’ve gone on keeping her still.’
‘But how have you managed?...’ Dolly was beginning a
question as to what name the little girl would have; but
noticing a sudden frown on Anna’s face, she changed the
drift of her question.
‘How did you manage? have you weaned her yet?’
But Anna had understood.
‘You didn’t mean to ask that? You meant to ask about
her surname. Yes? That worries Alexey. She has no
name—that is, she’s a Karenina,’ said Anna, dropping her
eyelids till nothing could be seen but the eyelashes
meeting. ‘But we’ll talk about all that later,’ her face
suddenly brightening. ‘Come, I’ll show you her. Elle est
tres gentille. She crawls now.’
In the nursery the luxury which had impressed Dolly in
the whole house struck her still more. There were little
go-carts ordered from England, and appliances for learning
to walk, and a sofa after the fashion of a billiard table,
purposely constructed for crawling, and swings and baths,
all of special pattern, and modern. They were all English,
solid, and of good make, and obviously very expensive.
The room was large, and very light and lofty.
Anna Karenina
1337 of 1759
When they went in, the baby, with nothing on but her
little smock was sitting in a little elbow chair at the table,
having her dinner of broth which she was spilling all over
her little chest. The baby was being fed, and the Russian
nursery maid was evidently sharing her meal. Neither the
wet-nurse nor the head nurse were there; they were in the
next room, from which came the sound of their
conversation in the queer French which was their only
means of communication.
Hearing Anna’s voice, a smart, tall, English nurse with
a disagreeable face and a dissolute expression walked in at
the door, hurriedly shaking her fair curls, and immediately
began to defend herself though Anna had not found fault
with her. At every word Anna said, the English nurse said
hurriedly several times, ‘Yes, my lady.’
The rosy baby with her black eyebrows and hair, her
sturdy red little body with tight goose-flesh skin, delighted
Darya Alexandrovna in spite of the cross expression with
which she stared at the stranger. She positively envied the
baby’s healthy appearance. She was delighted, too, at the
baby’s crawling. Not one of her own children had crawled
like that. When the baby was put on the carpet and its
little dress tucked up behind, it was wonderfully charming.
Looking round like some little wild animal at the grown-
Anna Karenina
1338 of 1759
up big people with her bright black eyes, she smiled,
unmistakably pleased at their admiring her, and holding
her legs sideways, she pressed vigorously on her arms, and
rapidly drew her whole back up after, and then made
another step forward with her little arms.
But the whole atmosphere of the nursery, and
especially the English nurse, Darya Alexandrovna did not
like at all. It was only on the supposition that no good
nurse would have entered so irregular a household as
Anna’s that Darya Alexandrovna could explain to herself
how Anna with her insight into people could take such an
unprepossessing, disreputable-looking woman as nurse to
her child.
Besides, from a few words that were dropped, Darya
Alexandrovna saw at once that Anna, the two nurses, and
the child had no common existence, and that the mother’s
visit was something exceptional. Anna wanted to get the
baby her plaything, and could not find it.
Most amazing of all was the fact that on being asked
how many teeth the baby had, Anna answered wrong, and
knew nothing about the two last teeth.
‘I sometimes feel sorry I’m so superfluous here,’ said
Anna, going out of the nursery and holding up her skirt so
Anna Karenina
1339 of 1759
as to escape the plaything standing in the doorway. ‘It was
very different with my first child.’
‘I expected it to be the other way,’ said Darya
Alexandrovna shyly.
‘Oh, no! By the way, do you know I saw Seryozha?’
said Anna; screwing up her eyes, as though looking at
something far away. ‘But we’ll talk about that later. You
wouldn’t believe it, I’m like a hungry beggar woman
when a full dinner is set before her, and she does not
know what to begin on first. The dinner is you, and the
talks I have before me with you, which I could never have
with anyone else; and I don’t know which subject to
begin upon first. Mais je ne vous ferai grace de rien. I
must have everything out with you.’
‘Oh, I ought to give you a sketch of the company you
will meet with us,’ she went on. ‘I’ll begin with the ladies.
Princess Varvara—you know her, and I know your
opinion and Stiva’s about her. Stiva says the whole aim of
her existence is to prove her superiority over Auntie
Katerina Pavlovna: that’s all true; but she’s a good-natured
woman, and I am so grateful to her. In Petersburg there
was a moment when a chaperon was absolutely essential
for me. Then she turned up. But really she is goodnatured. She did a great deal to alleviate my position. I see
Anna Karenina
1340 of 1759
you don’t understand all the difficulty of my
position...there in Petersburg,’ she added. ‘Here I’m
perfectly at ease and happy. Well, of that later on, though.
Then Sviazhsky—he’s the marshal of the district, and he’s
a very good sort of a man, but he wants to get something
out of Alexey. You understand, with his property, now
that we are settled in the country, Alexey can exercise
great influence. Then there’s Tushkevitch—you have seen
him, you know—Betsy’s admirer. Now he’s been thrown
over and he’s come to see us. As Alexey says, he’s one of
those people who are very pleasant if one accepts them for
what they try to appear to be, et puis il est comme il faut,
as Princess Varvara says. Then Veslovsky...you know him.
A very nice boy,’ she said, and a sly smile curved her lips.
‘What’s this wild story about him and the Levins?
Veslovsky told Alexey about it, and we don’t believe it. Il
est tres gentil et naif,’ she said again with the same smile.
‘Men need occupation, and Alexey needs a circle, so I
value all these people. We have to have the house lively
and gay, so that Alexey may not long for any novelty.
Then you’ll see the steward—a German, a very good
fellow, and he understands his work. Alexey has a very
high opinion of him. Then the doctor, a young man, not
quite a Nihilist perhaps, but you know, eats with his
Anna Karenina
1341 of 1759
knife...but a very good doctor. Then the architect.... Une
petite cour!’
Chapter 20
‘Here’s Dolly for you, princess, you were so anxious to
see her,’ said Anna, coming out with Darya Alexandrovna
onto the stone terrace where Princess Varvara was sitting
in the shade at an embroidery frame, working at a cover
for Count Alexey Kirillovitch’s easy chair. ‘She says she
doesn’t want anything before dinner, but please order
some lunch for her, and I’ll go and look for Alexey and
bring them all in.’
Princess Varvara gave Dolly a cordial and rather
patronizing reception, and began at once explaining to her
that she was living with Anna because she had always
cared more for her than her sister Katerina Pavlovna, the
aunt that had brought Anna up, and that now, when every
onehad abandoned Anna, she thought it her duty to help
her in this most difficult period of transition.
‘Her husband will give her a divorce, and then I shall
go back to my solitude; but now I can be of use, and I am
doing my duty, however difficult it may be for me—not
like some other people. And how sweet it is of you, how
right of you to have come! They live like the best of
married couples; it’s for God to judge them, not for us.
Anna Karenina
1343 of 1759
And didn’t Biryuzovsky and Madame Avenieva...and Sam
Nikandrov, and Vassiliev and Madame Mamonova, and
Liza Neptunova... Did no one say anything about them?
And it has ended by their being received by everyone.
And then, c’est un interieur si joli, si comme il faut. Touta-fait a l’anglaise. On se reunit le matin au breakfast, et
puis on se separe. Everyone does as he pleases till
dinnertime. Dinner at seven o’clock. Stiva did very rightly
to send you. He needs their support. You know that
through his mother and brother he can do anything. And
then they do so much good. He didn’t tell you about his
hospital? Ce sera admirable—everything from Paris.’
Their conversation was interrupted by Anna, who had
found the men of the party in the billiard room, and
returned with them to the terrace. There was still a long
time before the dinner-hour, it was exquisite weather, and
so several different methods of spending the next two
hours were proposed. There were very many methods of
passing the time at Vozdvizhenskoe, and these were all
unlike those in use at Pokrovskoe.
‘Une partie de lawn-tennis,’ Veslovsky proposed, with
his handsome smile. ‘We’ll be partners again, Anna
Arkadyevna.’
Anna Karenina
1344 of 1759
‘No, it’s too hot; better stroll about the garden and
have a row in the boat, show Darya Alexandrovna the
river banks.’ Vronsky proposed.
‘I agree to anything,’ said Sviazhsky.
‘I imagine that what Dolly would like best would be a
stroll— wouldn’t you? And then the boat, perhaps,’ said
Anna.
So it was decided. Veslovsky and Tushkevitch went off
to the bathing place, promising to get the boat ready and
to wait there for them.
They walked along the path in two couples, Anna with
Sviazhsky, and Dolly with Vronsky. Dolly was a little
embarrassed and anxious in the new surroundings in
which she found herself. Abstractly, theoretically, she did
not merely justify, she positively approved of Anna’s
conduct. As is indeed not unfrequent with women of
unimpeachable virtue, weary of the monotony of
respectable existence, at a distance she not only excused
illicit love, she positively envied it. Besides, she loved
Anna with all her heart. But seeing Anna in actual life
among these strangers, with this fashionable tone that was
so new to Darya Alexandrovna, she felt ill at ease. What
she disliked particularly was seeing Princess Varvara ready
Anna Karenina
1345 of 1759
to overlook everything for the sake of the comforts she
enjoyed.
As a general principle, abstractly, Dolly approved of
Anna’s action; but to see the man for whose sake her
action had been taken was disagreeable to her. Moreover,
she had never liked Vronsky. She thought him very
proud, and saw nothing in him of which he could be
proud except his wealth. But against her own will, here in
his own house, he overawed her more than ever, and she
could not be at ease with him. She felt with him the same
feeling she had had with the maid about her dressing
jacket. Just as with the maid she had felt not exactly
ashamed, but embarrassed at her darns, so she felt with
him not exactly ashamed, but embarrassed at herself.
Dolly was ill at ease, and tried to find a subject of
conversation. Even though she supposed that, through his
pride, praise of his house and garden would be sure to be
disagreeable to him, she did all the same tell him how
much she liked his house.
‘Yes, it’s a very fine building, and in the good oldfashioned style,’ he said.
‘I like so much the court in front of the steps. Was that
always so?’
Anna Karenina
1346 of 1759
‘Oh, no!’ he said, and his face beamed with pleasure. ‘If
you could only have seen that court last spring!’
And he began, at first rather diffidently, but more and
more carried away by the subject as he went on, to draw
her attention to the various details of the decoration of his
house and garden. It was evident that, having devoted a
great deal of trouble to improve and beautify his home,
Vronsky felt a need to show off the improvements to a
new person, and was genuinely delighted at Darya
Alexandrovna’s praise.
‘If you would care to look at the hospital, and are not
tired, indeed, it’s not far. Shall we go?’ he said, glancing
into her face to convince himself that she was not bored.
‘Are you coming, Anna?’ he turned to her.
‘We will come, won’t we?’ she said, addressing
Sviazhsky. ‘Mais il ne faut pas laisser le pauvre Veslovsky
et Tushkevitch se morfondre la dans le bateau. We must
send and tell them.’
‘Yes, this is a monument he is setting up here,’ said
Anna, turning to Dolly with that sly smile of
comprehension with which she had previously talked
about the hospital.
Anna Karenina
1347 of 1759
‘Oh, it’s a work of real importance!’ said Sviazhsky. But
to show he was not trying to ingratiate himself with
Vronsky, he promptly added some slightly critical remarks.
‘I wonder, though, count,’ he said, ‘that while you do
so much for the health of the peasants, you take so little
interest in the schools.’
‘C’est devenu tellement commun les ecoles,’ said
Vronsky. ‘You understand it’s not on that account, but it
just happens so, my interest has been diverted elsewhere.
This way then to the hospital,’ he said to Darya
Alexandrovna, pointing to a turning out of the avenue.
The ladies put up their parasols and turned into the side
path. After going down several turnings, and going
through a little gate, Darya Alexandrovna saw standing on
rising ground before her a large pretentious-looking red
building, almost finished. The iron roof, which was not
yet painted, shone with dazzling brightness in the
sunshine. Beside the finished building another had been
begun, surrounded by scaffolding. Workmen in aprons,
standing on scaffolds, were laying bricks, pouring mortar
out of vats, and smoothing it with trowels.
‘How quickly work gets done with you!’ said
Sviazhsky. ‘When I was here last time the roof was not
on.’
Anna Karenina
1348 of 1759
‘By the autumn it will all be ready. Iside almost
everything is done,’ said Anna.
‘And what’s this new building?’
‘That’s the house for the doctor and the dispensary,’
answered Vronsky, seeing the architect in a short jacket
coming towards him; and excusing himself to the ladies,
he went to meet him.
Going round a hole where the workmen were slaking
lime, he stood still with the architect and began talking
rather warmly.
‘The front is still too low,’ he said to Anna, who had
asked what was the matter.
‘I said the foundation ought to be raised,’ said Anna.
‘Yes, of course it would have been much better, Anna
Arkadyevna,’ said the architect, ‘but now it’s too late.’
‘Yes, I take a great interest in it,’ Anna answered
Sviazhsky, who was expressing his surprise at her
knowledge of architecture. ‘This new building ought to
have been in harmony with the hospital. It was an
afterthought, and was begun without a plan.’
Vronsky, having finished his talk with the architect,
joined the ladies, and led them inside the hospital.
Although they were still at work on the cornices
outside and were painting on the ground floor, upstairs
Anna Karenina
1349 of 1759
almost all the rooms were finished. Going up the broad
cast-iron staircase to the landing, they walked into the first
large room. The walls were stuccoed to look like marble,
the huge plate-glass windows were already in, only the
parquet floor was not yet finished, and the carpenters, who
were planing a block of it, left their work, taking off the
bands that fastened their hair, to greet the gentry.
‘This is the reception room,’ said Vronsky. ‘Here there
will be a desk, tables, and benches, and nothing more.’
‘This way; let us go in here. Don’t go near the
window,’ said Anna, trying the paint to see if it were dry.
‘Alexey, the paint’s dry already,’ she added.
From the reception room they went into the corridor.
Here Vronsky showed them the mechanism for ventilation
on a novel system. Then he showed them marble baths,
and beds with extraordinary springs. Then he showed
them the wards one after another, the storeroom, the linen
room, then the heating stove of a new pattern, then the
trolleys, which would make no noise as they carried
everything needed along the corridors, and many other
things. Sviazhsky, as a connoisseur in the latest mechanical
improvements, appreciated everything fully. Dolly simply
wondered at all she had not seen before, and, anxious to
Anna Karenina
1350 of 1759
understand it all, made minute inquiries about everything,
which gave Vronsky great satisfaction.
‘Yes, I imagine that this will be the solitary example of
a properly fitted hospital in Russia,’ said Sviazhsky.
‘And won’t you have a lying-in ward?’ asked Dolly.
‘That’s so much needed in the country. I have often..’
In spite of his usual courtesy, Vronsky interrupted her.
‘This is not a lying-in home, but a hospital for the sick,
and is intended for all diseases, except infectious
complaints,’ he said. ‘Ah! look at this,’ and he rolled up to
Darya Alexandrovna an invalid chair that had just been
ordered for the convalescents. ‘Look.’ He sat down in the
chair and began moving it. ‘The patient can’t walk—still
too weak, perhaps, or something wrong with his legs, but
he must have air, and he moves, rolls himself along...’
Darya Alexandrovna was interested by everything. She
liked everything very much, but most of all she liked
Vronsky himself with his natural, simple-hearted
eagerness. ‘Yes, he’s a very nice, good man,’ she thought
several times, not hearing what he said, but looking at him
and penetrating into his expression, while she mentally put
herself in Anna’s place. She liked him so much just now
with his eager interest that she saw how Anna could be in
love with him.
Anna Karenina
1351 of 1759
Chapter 21
‘No, I think the princess is tired, and horses don’t
interest her,’ Vronsky said to Anna, who wanted to go on
to the stables, where Sviazhsky wished to see the new
stallion. ‘You go on, while I escort the princess home, and
we’ll have a little talk,’ he said, ‘if you would like that?’ he
added, turning to her.
‘I know nothing about horses, and I shall be delighted,’
answered Darya Alexandrovna, rather astonished.
She saw by Vronsky’s face that he wanted something
from her. She was not mistaken. As soon as they had
passed through the little gate back into the garden, he
looked in the direction Anna had taken, and having made
sure that she could neither hear nor see them, he began:
‘You guess that I have something I want to say to you,’
he said, looking at her with laughing eyes. ‘I am not
wrong in believing you to be a friend of Anna’s.’ He took
off his hat, and taking out his handkerchief, wiped his
head, which was growing bald.
Darya Alexandrovna made no answer, and merely
stared at him with dismay. When she was left alone with
Anna Karenina
1352 of 1759
him, she suddenly felt afraid; his laughing eyes and stern
expression scared her.
The most diverse suppositions as to what he was about
to speak of to her flashed into her brain. ‘He is going to
beg me to come to stay with them with the children, and
I shall have to refuse; or to create a set will receive Anna
in Moscow.... Or isn’t it Vassenka Veslovsky and his
relations with Anna? Or perhaps about Kitty, that he feels
he was to blame?’ All her conjectures were unpleasant, but
she did not guess what he really wanted to talk about to
her.
‘You have so much influence with Anna, she is so fond
of you,’ he said; ‘do help me.’
Darya Alexandrovna looked with timid inquiry into his
energetic face, which under the lime-trees was continually
being lighted up in patches by the sunshine, and then
passing into complete shadow again. She waited for him to
say more, but he walked in silence beside her, scratching
with his cane in the gravel.
‘You have come to see us, you, the only woman of
Anna’s former friends—I don’t count Princess Varvara—
but I know that you have done this not because you
regard our position as normal, but because, understanding
all the difficulty of the position, you still love her and want
Anna Karenina
1353 of 1759
to be a help to her. Have I understood you rightly?’ he
asked, looking round at her.
‘Oh, yes,’ answered Darya Alexandrovna, putting down
her sunshade, ‘but..’
‘No,’ he broke in, and unconsciously, oblivious of the
awkward position into which he was putting his
companion, he stopped abruptly, so that she had to stop
short too. ‘No one feels more deeply and intensely than I
do all the difficulty of Anna’s position; and that you may
well understand, if you do me the honor of supposing I
have any heart. I am to blame for that position, and that is
why I feel it.’
‘I understand,’ said Darya Alexandrovna, involuntarily
admiring the sincerity and firmness with which he said
this. ‘But just because you feel yourself responsible, you
exaggerate it, I am afraid,’ she said. ‘Her position in the
world is difficult, I can well understand.’
‘In the world it is hell!’ he brought out quickly,
frowning darkly. ‘You can’t imagine moral sufferings
greater than what she went through in Petersburg in that
fortnight...and I beg you to believe it.’
‘Yes, but here, so long as neither Anna...nor you miss
society..’
Anna Karenina
1354 of 1759
‘Society!’ he said contemptuously, ‘how could I miss
society?’
‘So far—and it may be so always—you are happy and at
peace. I see in Anna that she is happy, perfectly happy, she
has had time to tell me so much already,’ said Darya
Alexandrovna, smiling; and involuntarily, as she said this,
at the same moment a doubt entered her mind whether
Anna really were happy.
But Vronsky, it appeared, had no doubts on that score.
‘Yes, yes,’ he said, ‘I know that she has revived after all
her sufferings; she is happy. She is happy in the present.
But I?... I am afraid of what is before us...I beg your
pardon, you would like to walk on?’
‘No, I don’t mind.’
‘Well, then, let us sit here.’
Darya Alexandrovna sat down on a garden seat in a
corner of the avenue. He stood up facing her.
‘I see that she is happy,’ he repeated, and the doubt
whether she were happy sank more deeply into Darya
Alexandrovna’s mind. ‘But can it last? Whether we have
acted rightly or wrongly is another question, but the die is
cast,’ he said, passing from Russian to French, ‘and we are
bound together for life. We are united by all the ties of
love that we hold most sacred. We have a child, we may
Anna Karenina
1355 of 1759
have other children. But the law and all the conditions of
our position are such that thousands of complications arise
which she does not see and does not want to see. And that
one can well understand. But I can’t help seeing them. My
daughter is by law not my daughter, but Karenin’s. I
cannot bear this falsity!’ he said, with a vigorous gesture of
refusal, and he looked with gloomy inquiry towards Darya
Alexandrovna.
She made no answer, but simply gazed at him. He
went on:
‘One day a son may be born, my son, and he will be
legally a Karenin; he will not be the heir of my name nor
of my property, and however happy we may be in our
home life and however many children we may have, there
will be no real tie between us. They will be Karenins. You
can understand the bitterness and horror of this position! I
have tried to speak of this to Anna. It irritates her. She
does not understand, and to her I cannot speak plainly of
all this. Now look at another side. I am happy, happy in
her love, but I must have occupation. I have found
occupation, and am proud of what I am doing and
consider it nobler than the pursuits of my former
companions at court and in the army. And most certainly I
would not change the work I am doing for theirs. I am
Anna Karenina
1356 of 1759
working here, settled in my own place, and I am happy
and contented, and we need nothing more to make us
happy. I love my work here. Ce n’est pas un pis-aller, on
the contrary..’
Darya Alexandrovna noticed that at this point in his
explanation he grew confused, and she did not quite
understand this digression, but she felt that having once
begun to speak of matters near his heart, of which he
could not speak to Anna, he was now making a clean
breast of everything, and that the question of his pursuits
in the country fell into the same category of matters near
his heart, as the question of his relations with Anna.
‘Well, I will go on,’ he said, collecting himself. ‘The
great thing is that as I work I want to have a conviction
that what I am doing will not die with me, that I shall
have heirs to come after me,—and this I have not.
Conceive the position of a man who knows that his
children, the children of the woman he loves, will not be
his, but will belong to someone who hates them and cares
nothing about them! It is awful!’
He paused, evidently much moved.
‘Yes, indeed, I see that. But what can Anna do?’
queried Darya Alexandrovna.
Anna Karenina
1357 of 1759
‘Yes, that brings me to the object of my conversation,’
he said, calming himself with an effort. ‘Anna can, it
depends on her.... Even to petition the Tsar for
legitimization, a divorce is essential. And that depends on
Anna. Her husband agreed to a divorce—at that time your
husband had arranged it completely. And now, I know, he
would not refuse it. It is only a matter of writing to him.
He said plainly at that time that if she expressed the desire,
he would not refuse. Of course,’ he said gloomily, ‘it is
one of those Pharisaical cruelties of which only such
heartless men are capable. He knows what agony any
recollection of him must give her, and knowing her, he
must have a letter from her. I can understand that it is
agony to her. But the matter is of such importance, that
one must passer par-dessus toutes ces finesses de sentiment.
Il y va du bonheur et de l’existence d’Anne et de ses
enfants. I won’t speak of myself, though it’s hard for me,
very hard,’ he said, with an expression as though he were
threatening someone for its being hard for him. ‘And so it
is, princess, that I am shamelessly clutching at you as an
anchor of salvation. Help me to persuade her to write to
him and ask for a divorce.’
‘Yes, of course,’ Darya Alexandrovna said dreamily, as
she vividly recalled her last interview with Alexey
Anna Karenina
1358 of 1759
Alexandrovitch. ‘Yes, of course,’ she repeated with
decision, thinking of Anna.
‘Use your influence with her, make her write. I don’t
like—I’m almost unable to speak about this to her.’
‘Very well, I will talk to her. But how is it she does not
think of it herself?’ said Darya Alexandrovna, and for some
reason she suddenly at that point recalled Anna’s strange
new habit of half-closing her eyes. And she remembered
that Anna drooped her eyelids just when the deeper
questions of life were touched upon. ‘Just as though she
half-shut her eyes to her own life, so as not to see
everything,’ thought Dolly. ‘Yes, indeed, for my own sake
and for hers I will talk to her,’ Dolly said in reply to his
look of gratitude.
They got up and walked to the house.
Chapter 22
When Anna found Dolly at home before her, she
looked intently in her eyes, as though questioning her
about the talk she had had with Vronsky, but she made no
inquiry in words.
‘I believe it’s dinner time,’ she said. ‘We’ve not seen
each other at all yet. I am reckoning on the evening. Now
I want to go and dress. I expect you do too; we all got
splashed at the buildings.’
Dolly went to her room and she felt amused. To
change her dress was impossible, for she had already put
on her best dress. But in order to signify in some way her
preparation for dinner, she asked the maid to brush her
dress, changed her cuffs and tie, and put some lace on her
head.
‘This is all I can do,’ she said with a smile to Anna,
who came in to her in a third dress, again of extreme
simplicity.
‘Yes, we are too formal here,’ she said, as it were
apologizing for her magnificence. ‘Alexey is delighted at
your visit, as he rarely is at anything. He has completely
lost his heart to you,’ she added. ‘You’re not tired?’
Anna Karenina
1360 of 1759
There was no time for talking about anything before
dinner. Going into the drawing room they found Princess
Varvara already there, and the gentlemen of the party in
black frock-coats. The architect wore a swallow-tail coat.
Vronsky presented the doctor and the steward to his guest.
The architect he had already introduced to her at the
hospital.
A stout butler, resplendent with a smoothly shaven
round chin and a starched white cravat, announced that
dinner was ready, and the ladies got up. Vronsky asked
Sviazhsky to take in Anna Arkadyevna, and himself offered
his arm to Dolly. Veslovsky was before Tushkevitch in
offering his arm to Princess Varvara, so that Tushkevitch
with the steward and the doctor walked in alone.
The dinner, the dining room, the service, the waiting
at table, the wine, and the food, were not simply in
keeping with the general tone of modern luxury
throughout all the house, but seemed even more
sumptuous and modern. Darya Alexandrovna watched this
luxury which was novel to her, and as a good housekeeper
used to managing a household—although she never
dreamed of adapting anything she saw to her own
household, as it was all in a style of luxury far above her
own manner of living—she could not help scrutinizing
Anna Karenina
1361 of 1759
every detail, and wondering how and by whom it was all
done. Vassenka Veslovsky, her husband, and even
Sviazhsky, and many other people she knew, would never
have considered this question, and would have readily
believed what every well-bred host tries to make his guests
feel, that is, that all that is well-ordered in his house has
cost him, the host, no trouble whatever, but comes of
itself. Darya Alexandrovna was well aware that even
porridge for the children’s breakfast does not come of
itself, and that therefore, where so complicated and
magnificent a style of luxury was maintained, someone
must give earnest attention to its organization. And from
the glance with which Alexey Kirillovitch scanned the
table, from the way he nodded to the butler, and offered
Darya Alexandrovna her choice between cold soup and
hot soup, she saw that it was all organized and maintained
by the care of the master of the house himself. It was
evident that it all rested no more upon Anna than upon
Veslovsky. She, Sviazhsky, the princess, and Veslovsky,
were equally guests, with light hearts enjoying what had
been arranged for them.
Anna was the hostess only in conducting the
conversation. The conversation was a difficult one for the
lady of the house at a small table with persons present, like
Anna Karenina
1362 of 1759
the steward and the architect, belonging to a completely
different world, struggling not to be overawed by an
elegance to which they were unaccustomed, and unable to
sustain a large share in the general conversation. But this
difficult conversation Anna directed with her usual tact
and naturalness, and indeed she did so with actual
enjoyment, as Darya Alexandrovna observed. The
conversation began about the row Tushkevitch and
Veslovsky had taken alone together in the boat, and
Tushkevitch began describing the last boat races in
Petersburg at the Yacht Club. But Anna, seizing the first
pause, at once turned to the architect to draw him out of
his silence.
‘Nikolay Ivanitch was struck,’ she said, meaning
Sviazhsky, ‘at the progress the new building had made
since he was here last; but I am there every day, and every
day I wonder at the rate at which it grows.’
‘It’s first-rate working with his excellency,’ said the
architect with a smile (he was respectful and composed,
though with a sense of his own dignity). ‘It’s a very
different matter to have to do with the district authorities.
Where one would have to write out sheaves of papers,
here I call upon the count, and in three words we settle
the business.’
Anna Karenina
1363 of 1759
‘The American way of doing business,’ said Sviazhsky,
with a smile.
‘Yes, there they build in a rational fashion..’
The conversation passed to the misuse of political
power in the United States, but Anna quickly brought it
round to another topic, so as to draw the steward into talk.
‘Have you ever seen a reaping machine?’ she said,
addressing Darya Alexandrovna. ‘We had just ridden over
to look at one when we met. It’s the first time I ever saw
one.’
‘How do they work?’ asked Dolly.
‘Exactly like little scissors. A plank and a lot of little
scissors. Like this.’
Anna took a knife and fork in her beautiful white hands
covered with rings, and began showing how the machine
worked. It was clear that she saw nothing would be
understood from her explanation; but aware that her talk
was pleasant and her hands beautiful she went on
explaining.
‘More like little penknives,’ Veslovsky said playfully,
never taking his eyes off her.
Anna gave a just perceptible smile, but made no
answer. ‘Isn’t it true, Karl Fedoritch, that it’s just like little
scissors?’ she said to the steward.
Anna Karenina
1364 of 1759
‘Oh, ja,’ answered the German. ‘Es it ein ganz
einfaches Ding,’ and he began to explain the construction
of the machine.
‘It’s a pity it doesn’t bind too. I saw one at the Vienna
exhibition, which binds with a wire,’ said Sviazhsky.
‘They would be more profitable in use.’
‘Es kommt drauf an.... Der Preis vom Draht muss
ausgerechnet werden.’ And the German, roused from his
taciturnity, turned to Vronsky. ‘Das laesst sich ausrechnen,
Erlaucht.’ The German was just feeling in the pocket
where were his pencil and the notebook he always wrote
in, but recollecting that he was at a dinner, and observing
Vronsky’s chilly glance, he checked himself. ‘Zu
compliziert, macht zu viel Klopot,’ he concluded.
‘Wuenscht man Dochots, so hat man auch Klopots,’
said Vassenka Veslovsky, mimicking the German. ‘J’adore
l’allemand,’ he addressed Anna again with the same smile.
‘Cessez,’ she said with playful severity.
‘We expected to find you in the fields, Vassily
Semyonitch,’ she said to the doctor, a sickly-looking man;
‘have you been there?’
‘I went there, but I had taken flight,’ the doctor
answered with gloomy jocoseness.
‘Then you’ve taken a good constitutional?’
Anna Karenina
1365 of 1759
‘Splendid!’
‘Well, and how was the old woman? I hope it’s not
typhus?’
‘Typhus it is not, but it’s taking a bad turn.’
‘What a pity!’ said Anna, and having thus paid the dues
of civility to her domestic circle, she turned to her own
friends.
‘It would be a hard task, though, to construct a
machine from your description, Anna Arkadyevna,’
Sviazhsky said jestingly.
‘Oh, no, why so?’ said Anna with a smile that betrayed
that she knew there was something charming in her
disquisitions upon the machine that had been noticed by
Sviazhsky. This new trait of girlish coquettishness made an
unpleasant impression on Dolly.
‘But Anna Arkadyevna’s knowledge of architecture is
marvelous,’ said Tushkevitch.
‘To be sure, I heard Anna Arkadyevna talking yesterday
about plinths and damp-courses,’ said Veslovsky. ‘Have I
got it right?’
‘There’s nothing marvelous about it, when one sees
and hears so much of it,’ said Anna. ‘But, I dare say, you
don’t even know what houses are made of?’
Anna Karenina
1366 of 1759
Darya Alexandrovna saw that Anna disliked the tone of
raillery that existed between her and Veslovsky, but fell in
with it against her will.
Vronsky acted in this matter quite differently from
Levin. He obviously attached no significance to
Veslovsky’s chattering; on the contrary, he encouraged his
jests.
‘Come now, tell us, Veslovsky, how are the stones held
together?’
‘By cement, of course.’
‘Bravo! And what is cement?’
‘Oh, some sort of paste ...no, putty,’ said Veslovsky,
raising a general laugh.
The company at dinner, with the exception of the
doctor, the architect, and the steward, who remained
plunged in gloomy silence, kept up a conversation that
never paused, glancing off one subject, fastening on
another, and at times stinging one or the other to the
quick. Once Darya Alexandrovna felt wounded to the
quick, and got so hot that she positively flushed and
wondered afterwards whether she had said anything
extreme or unpleasant. Sviazhsky began talking of Levin,
describing his strange view that machinery is simply
pernicious in its effects on Russian agriculture.
Anna Karenina
1367 of 1759
‘I have not the pleasure of knowing this M. Levin,’
Vronsky said, smiling, ‘but most likely he has never seen
the machines he condemns; or if he has seen and tried any,
it must have been after a queer fashion, some Russian
imitation, not a machine from abroad. What sort of views
can anyone have on such a subject?’
‘Turkish views, in general,’ Veslovsky said, turning to
Anna with a smile.
‘I can’t defend his opinions,’ Darya Alexandrovna said,
firing up; ‘but I can say that he’s a highly cultivated man,
and if he were here he would know very well how to
answer you, though I am not capable of doing so.’
‘I like him extremely, and we are great friends,’
Sviazhsky said, smiling good-naturedly. ‘Mais pardon, il
est un petit peu toque; he maintains, for instance, that
district councils and arbitration boards are all of no use,
and he is unwilling to take part in anything.’
‘It’s our Russian apathy,’ said Vronsky, pouring water
from an iced decanter into a delicate glass on a high stem;
‘we’ve no sense of the duties our privileges impose upon
us, and so we refuse to recognize these duties.’
‘I know no man more strict in the performance of his
duties,’ said Darya Alexandrovna, irritated by Vronsky’s
tone of superiority.
Anna Karenina
1368 of 1759
‘For my part,’ pursued Vronsky, who was evidently for
some reason or other keenly affected by this conversation,
‘such as I am, I am, on the contrary, extremely grateful for
the honor they have done me, thanks to Nikolay Ivanitch’
(he indicated Sviazhsky), ‘in electing me a justice of the
peace. I consider that for me the duty of being present at
the session, of judging some peasants’ quarrel about a
horse, is as important as anything I can do. And I shall
regard it as an honor if they elect me for the district
council. It’s only in that way I can pay for the advantages I
enjoy as a landowner. Unluckily they don’t understand the
weight that the big landowners ought to have in the state.’
It was strange to Darya Alexandrovna to hear how
serenely confident he was of being right at his own table.
She thought how Levin, who believed the opposite, was
just as positive in his opinions at his own table. But she
loved Levin, and so she was on his side.
‘So we can reckon upon you, count, for the coming
elections?’ said Sviazhsky. ‘But you must come a little
beforehand, so as to be on the spot by the eighth. If you
would do me the honor to stop with me.’
‘I rather agree with your beau-frere,’ said Anna,
‘though not quite on the same ground as he,’ she added
with a smile. ‘I’m afraid that we have too many of these
Anna Karenina
1369 of 1759
public duties in these latter days. Just as in old days there
were so many government functionaries that one had to
call in a functionary for every single thing, so now
everyone’s doing some sort of public duty. Alexey has
been here now six months, and he’s a member, I do
believe, of five or six different public bodies. Du train que
cela va, the whole time will be wasted on it. And I’m
afraid that with such a multiplicity of these bodies, they’ll
end in being a mere form. How many are you a member
of, Nikolay Ivanitch?’ she turned to Sviazhsky—‘over
twenty, I fancy.’
Anna spoke lightly, but irritation could be discerned in
her tone. Darya Alexandrovna, watching Anna and
Vronsky attentively, detected it instantly. She noticed, too,
that as she spoke Vronsky’s face had immediately taken a
serious and obstinate expression. Noticing this, and that
Princess Varvara at once made haste to change the
conversation by talking of Petersburg acquaintances, and
remembering what Vronsky had without apparent
connection said in the garden of his work in the country,
Dolly surmised that this question of public activity was
connected with some deep private disagreement between
Anna and Vronsky.
Anna Karenina
1370 of 1759
The dinner, the wine, the decoration of the table were
all very good; but it was all like what Darya Alexandrovna
had seen at formal dinners and balls which of late years had
become quite unfamiliar to her; it all had the same
impersonal and constrained character, and so on an
ordinary day and in a little circle of friends it made a
disagreeable impression on her.
After dinner they sat on the terrace, then they
proceeded to play lawn tennis. The players, divided into
two parties, stood on opposite sides of a tightly drawn net
with gilt poles on the carefully leveled and rolled croquetground. Darya Alexandrovna made an attempt to play, but
it was a long time before she could understand the game,
and by the time she did understand it, she was so tired that
she sat down with Princess Varvara and simply looked on
at the players. Her partner, Tushkevitch, gave up playing
too, but the others kept the game up for a long time.
Sviazhsky and Vronsky both played very well and
seriously. They kept a sharp lookout on the balls served to
them, and without haste or getting in each other’s way,
they ran adroitly up to them, waited for the rebound, and
neatly and accurately returned them over the net.
Veslovsky played worse than the others. He was too eager,
but he kept the players lively with his high spirits. His
Anna Karenina
1371 of 1759
laughter and outcries never paused. Like the other men of
the party, with the ladies’ permission, he took off his coat,
and his solid, comely figure in his white shirt-sleeves, with
his red perspiring face and his impulsive movements, made
a picture that imprinted itself vividly on the memory.
When Darya Alexandrovna lay in bed that night, as
soon as she closed her eyes, she saw Vassenka Veslovsky
flying about the croquet ground.
During the game Darya Alexandrovna was not
enjoying herself. She did not like the light tone of raillery
that was kept up all the time between Vassenka Veslovsky
and Anna, and the unnaturalness altogether of grown-up
people, all alone without children, playing at a child’s
game. But to avoid breaking up the party and to get
through the time somehow, after a rest she joined the
game again, and pretended to be enjoying it. All that day
it seemed to her as though she were acting in a theater
with actors cleverer than she, and that her bad acting was
spoiling the whole performance. She had come with the
intention of staying two days, if all went well. But in the
evening, during the game, she made up her mind that she
would go home next day. The maternal cares and worries,
which she had so hated on the way, now, after a day spent
Anna Karenina
1372 of 1759
without them, struck her in quite another light, and
tempted her back to them.
When, after evening tea and a row by night in the
boat, Darya Alexandrovna went alone to her room, took
off her dress, and began arranging her thin hair for the
night, she had a great sense of relief.
It was positively disagreeable to her to think that Anna
was coming to see her immediately. She longed to be
alone with her own thoughts.
Anna Karenina
1373 of 1759
Chapter 23
Dolly was wanting to go to bed when Anna came in to
see her, attired for the night. In the course of the day
Anna had several times begun to speak of matters near her
heart, and every time after a few words she had stopped:
‘Afterwards, by ourselves, we’ll talk about everything. I’ve
got so much I want to tell you,’ she said.
Now they were by themselves, and Anna did not know
what to talk about. She sat in the window looking at
Dolly, and going over in her own mind all the stores of
intimate talk which had seemed so inexhaustible
beforehand, and she found nothing. At that moment it
seemed to her that everything had been said already.
‘Well, what of Kitty?’ she said with a heavy sigh,
looking penitently at Dolly. ‘Tell me the truth, Dolly: isn’t
she angry with me?’
‘Angry? Oh, no!’ said Darya Alexandrovna, smiling.
‘But she hates me, despises me?’
‘Oh, no! But you know that sort of thing isn’t
forgiven.’
‘Yes, yes,’ said Anna, turning away and looking out of
the open window. ‘But I was not to blame. And who is to
Anna Karenina
1374 of 1759
blame? What’s the meaning of being to blame? Could it
have been otherwise? What do you think? Could it
possibly have happened that you didn’t become the wife
of Stiva?’
‘Really, I don’t know. But this is what I want you to
tell me..’
‘Yes, yes, but we’ve not finished about Kitty. Is she
happy? He’s a very nice man, they say.’
‘He’s much more than very nice. I don’t know a better
man.’
‘Ah, how glad I am! I’m so glad! Much more than very
nice,’ she repeated.
Dolly smiled.
‘But tell me about yourself. We’ve a great deal to talk
about. And I’ve had a talk with...’ Dolly did not know
what to call him. She felt it awkward to call him either the
count or Alexey Kirillovitch.
‘With Alexey,’ said Anna, ‘I know what you talked
about. But I wanted to ask you directly what you think of
me, of my life?’
‘How am I to say like that straight off? I really don’t
know.’
‘No, tell me all the same.... You see my life. But you
mustn’t forget that you’re seeing us in the summer, when
Anna Karenina
1375 of 1759
you have come to us and we are not alone.... But we
came here early in the spring, lived quite alone, and shall
be alone again, and I desire nothing better. But imagine
me living alone without him, alone, and that will be...I see
by everything that it will often be repeated, that he will be
half the time away from home,’ she said, getting up and
sitting down close by Dolly.
‘Of course,’ she interrupted Dolly, who would have
answered, ‘of course I won’t try to keep him by force. I
don’t keep him indeed. The races are just coming, his
horses are running, he will go. I’m very glad. But think of
me, fancy my position.... But what’s the use of talking
about it?’ She smiled. ‘Well, what did he talk about with
you?’
‘He spoke of what I want to speak about of myself, and
it’s easy for me to be his advocate; of whether there is not
a possibility ...whether you could not...’ (Darya
Alexandrovna hesitated) ‘correct, improve your position....
You know how I look at it.... But all the same, if possible,
you should get married...’
‘Divorce, you mean?’ said Anna. ‘Do you know, the
only woman who came to see me in Petersburg was Betsy
Tverskaya? You know her, of course? Au fond, c’est la
femme la plus depravee qui existe. She had an intrigue
Anna Karenina
1376 of 1759
with Tushkevitch, deceiving her husband in the basest
way. And she told me that she did not care to know me so
long as my position was irregular. Don’t imagine I would
compare...I know you, darling. But I could not help
remembering.... Well, so what did he say to you?’ she
repeated.
‘He said that he was unhappy on your account and his
own. Perhaps you will say that it’s egoism, but what a
legitimate and noble egoism. He wants first of all to
legitimize his daughter, and to be your husband, to have a
legal right to you.’
‘What wife, what slave can be so utterly a slave as I, in
my position?’ she put in gloomily.
‘The chief thing he desires...he desires that you should
not suffer.’
‘That’s impossible. Well?’
‘Well, and the most legitimate desire—he wishes that
your children should have a name.’
‘What children?’ Anna said, not looking at Dolly, and
half closing her eyes.
‘Annie and those to come..’
‘He need not trouble on that score; I shall have no
more children.’
‘How can you tell that you won’t?’
Anna Karenina
1377 of 1759
‘I shall not, because I don’t wish it.’ And, in spite of all
her emotion, Anna smiled, as she caught the naive
expression of curiosity, wonder, and horror on Dolly’s
face.
‘The doctor told me after my illness..’
‘Impossible!’ said Dolly, opening her eyes wide.
For her this was one of those discoveries the
consequences and deductions from which are so immense
that all that one feels for the first instant is that it is
impossible to take it all in, and that one will have to reflect
a great, great deal upon it.
This discovery, suddenly throwing light on all those
families of one or two children, which had hitherto been
so incomprehensible to her, aroused so many ideas,
reflections, and contradictory emotions, that she had
nothing to say, and simply gazed with wide-open eyes of
wonder at Anna. This was the very thing she had been
dreaming of, but now learning that it was possible, she was
horrified. She felt that it was too simple a solution of too
complicated a problem.
‘N’est-ce pas immoral?’ was all she said, after a brief
pause.
‘Why so? Think, I have a choice between two
alternatives: either to be with child, that is an invalid, or to
Anna Karenina
1378 of 1759
be the friend and companion of my husband—practically
my husband,’ Anna said in a tone intentionally superficial
and frivolous.
‘Yes, yes,’ said Darya Alexandrovna, hearing the very
arguments she had used to herself, and not finding the
same force in them as before.
‘For you, for other people,’ said Anna, as though
divining her thoughts, ‘there may be reason to hesitate;
but for me.... You must consider, I am not his wife; he
loves me as long as he loves me. And how am I to keep
his love? Not like this!’
She moved her white hands in a curve before her waist
with extraordinary rapidity, as happens during moments of
excitement; ideas and memories rushed into Darya
Alexandrovna’s head. ‘I,’ she thought, ‘did not keep my
attraction for Stiva; he left me for others, and the first
woman for whom he betrayed me did not keep him by
being always pretty and lively. He deserted her and took
another. And can Anna attract and keep Count Vronsky in
that way? If that is what he looks for, he will find dresses
and manners still more attractive and charming. And
however white and beautiful her bare arms are, however
beautiful her full figure and her eager face under her black
Anna Karenina
1379 of 1759
curls, he will find something better still, just as my
disgusting, pitiful, and charming husband does.’
Dolly made no answer, she merely sighed. Anna
noticed this sigh, indicating dissent, and she went on. In
her armory she had other arguments so strong that no
answer could be made to them.
‘Do you say that it’s not right? But you must consider,’
she went on; ‘you forget my position. How can I desire
children? I’m not speaking of the suffering, I’m not afraid
of that. Think only, what are my children to be? Ill-fated
children, who will have to bear a stranger’s name. For the
very fact of their birth they will be forced to be ashamed
of their mother, their father, their birth.’
‘But that is just why a divorce is necessary.’ But Anna
did not hear her. She longed to give utterance to all the
arguments with which she had so many times convinced
herself.
‘What is reason given me for, if I am not to use it to
avoid bringing unhappy beings into the world!’ She
looked at Dolly, but without waiting for a reply she went
on:
‘I should always feel I had wronged these unhappy
children,’ she said. ‘If they are not, at any rate they are not
Anna Karenina
1380 of 1759
unhappy; while if they are unhappy, I alone should be to
blame for it.’
These were the very arguments Darya Alexandrovna
had used in her own reflections; but she heard them
without understanding them. ‘How can one wrong
creatures that don’t exist?’ she thought. And all at once the
idea struck her: could it possibly, under any circumstances,
have been better for her favorite Grisha if he had never
existed? And this seemed to her so wild, so strange, that
she shook her head to drive away this tangle of whirling,
mad ideas.
‘No, I don’t know; it’s not right,’ was all she said, with
an expression of disgust on her face.
‘Yes, but you mustn’t forget that you and I.... And
besides that,’ added Anna, in spite of the wealth of her
arguments and the poverty of Dolly’s objections, seeming
still to admit that it was not right, ‘don’t forget the chief
point, that I am not now in the same position as you. For
you the question is: do you desire not to have any more
children; while for me it is: do I desire to have them? And
that’s a great difference. You must see that I can’t desire it
in my position.’
Darya Alexandrovna made no reply. She suddenly felt
that she had got far away from Anna; that there lay
Anna Karenina
1381 of 1759
between them a barrier of questions on which they could
never agree, and about which it was better not to speak.
Anna Karenina
1382 of 1759
Chapter 24
‘Then there is all the more reason for you to legalize
your position, if possible,’ said Dolly.
‘Yes, if possible,’ said Anna, speaking all at once in an
utterly different tone, subdued and mournful.
‘Surely you don’t mean a divorce is impossible? I was
told your husband had consented to it.’
‘Dolly, I don’t want to talk about that.’
‘Oh, we won’t then,’ Darya Alexandrovna hastened to
say, noticing the expression of suffering on Anna’s face.
‘All I see is that you take too gloomy a view of things.’
‘I? Not at all! I’m always bright and happy. You see, je
fais des passions. Veslovsky..’
‘Yes, to tell the truth, I don’t like Veslovsky’s tone,’
said Darya Alexandrovna, anxious to change the subject.
‘Oh, that’s nonsense! It amuses Alexey, and that’s all;
but he’s a boy, and quite under my control. You know, I
turn him as I please. It’s just as it might be with your
Grisha.... Dolly!’— she suddenly changed the subject—
‘you say I take too gloomy a view of things. You can’t
understand. It’s too awful! I try not to take any view of it
at all.’
Anna Karenina
1383 of 1759
‘But I think you ought to. You ought to do all you
can.’
‘But what can I do? Nothing. You tell me to marry
Alexey, and say I don’t think about it. I don’t think about
it!’ she repeated, and a flush rose into her face. She got up,
straightening her chest, and sighed heavily. With her light
step she began pacing up and down the room, stopping
now and then. ‘I don’t think of it? Not a day, not an hour
passes that I don’t think of it, and blame myself for
thinking of it...because thinking of that may drive me
mad. Drive me mad!’ she repeated. ‘When I think of it, I
can’t sleep without morphine. But never mind. Let us talk
quietly. They tell me, divorce. In the first place, he won’t
give me a divorce. He’s under the influence of Countess
Lidia Ivanovna now.’
Darya Alexandrovna, sitting erect on a chair, turned
her head, following Anna with a face of sympathetic
suffering.
‘You ought to make the attempt,’ she said softly.
‘Suppose I make the attempt. What does it mean?’ she
said, evidently giving utterance to a thought, a thousand
times thought over and learned by heart. ‘It means that I,
hating him, but still recognizing that I have wronged
him—and I consider him magnanimous—that I humiliate
Anna Karenina
1384 of 1759
myself to write to him.... Well, suppose I make the effort;
I do it. Either I receive a humiliating refusal or consent....
Well, I have received his consent, say...’ Anna was at that
moment at the furthest end of the room, and she stopped
there, doing something to the curtain at the window. ‘I
receive his consent, but my...my son? They won’t give
him up to me. He will grow up despising me, with his
father, whom I’ve abandoned. Do you see, I love...
equally, I think, but both more than myself—two
creatures, Seryozha and Alexey.’
She came out into the middle of the room and stood
facing Dolly, with her arms pressed tightly across her
chest. I her white dressing gown her figure seemed more
than usually grand and broad. She bent her head, and with
shining, wet eyes looked from under her brows at Dolly, a
thin little pitiful figure in her patched dressing jacket and
nightcap, shaking all over with emotion.
‘It is only those two creatures that I love, and one
excludes the other. I can’t have them together, and that’s
the only thing I want. And since I can’t have that, I don’t
care about the rest. I don’t care about anything, anything.
And it will end one way or another, and so I can’t, I don’t
like to talk of it. So don’t blame me, don’t judge me for
anything. You can’t with your pure heart understand all
Anna Karenina
1385 of 1759
that I’m suffering.’ She went up, sat down beside Dolly,
and with a guilty look, peeped into her face and took her
hand.
‘What are you thinking? What are you thinking about
me? Don’t despise me. I don’t deserve contempt. I’m
simply unhappy. If anyone is unhappy, I am,’ she
articulated, and turning away, she burst into tears.
Left alone, Darya Alexandrovna said her prayers and
went to bed. She had felt for Anna with all her heart while
she was speaking to her, but now she could not force
herself to think of her. The memories of home and of her
children rose up in her imagination with a peculiar charm
quite new to her, with a sort of new brilliance. That world
of her own seemed to her now so sweet and precious that
she would not on any account spend an extra day outside
it, and she made up her mind that she would certainly go
back next day.
Anna meantime went back to her boudoir, took a wine
glass and dropped into it several drops of a medicine, of
which the principal ingredient was morphine. After
drinking it off and sitting still a little while, she went into
her bedroom in a soothed and more cheerful frame of
mind.
Anna Karenina
1386 of 1759
When she went into the bedroom, Vronsky looked
intently at her. He was looking for traces of the
conversation which he knew that, staying so long in
Dolly’s room, she must have had with her. But in her
expression of restrained excitement, and of a sort of
reserve, he could find nothing but the beauty that always
bewitched him afresh though he was used to it, the
consciousness of it, and the desire that it should affect him.
He did not want to ask her what they had been talking of,
but he hoped that she would tell him something of her
own accord. But she only said:
‘I am so glad you like Dolly. You do, don’t you?’
‘Oh, I’ve known her a long while, you know. She’s
very good-hearted, I suppose, mais excessivement terre-aterre. Still, I’m very glad to see her.’
He took Anna’s hand and looked inquiringly into her
eyes.
Misinterpreting the look, she smiled to him. Next
morning, in spite of the protests of her hosts, Darya
Alexandrovna prepared for her homeward journey.
Levin’s coachman, in his by no means new coat and
shabby hat, with his ill-matched horses and his coach with
the patched mud-guards, drove with gloomy
determination into the covered gravel approach.
Anna Karenina
1387 of 1759
Darya Alexandrovna disliked taking leave of Princess
Varvara and the gentlemen of the party. After a day spent
together, both she and her hosts were distinctly aware that
they did not get on together, and that it was better for
them not to meet. Only Anna was sad. She knew that
now, from Dolly’s departure, no one again would stir up
within her soul the feelings that had been roused by their
conversation. It hurt her to stir up these feelings, but yet
she knew that that was the best part of her soul, and that
that part of her soul would quickly be smothered in the
life she was leading.
As she drove out into the open country, Darya
Alexandrovna had a delightful sense of relief, and she felt
tempted to ask the two men how they had liked being at
Vronsky’s, when suddenly the coachman, Philip, expressed
himself unasked:
‘Rolling in wealth they may be, but three pots of oats
was all they gave us. Everything cleared up till there
wasn’t a grain left by cockcrow. What are three pots? A
mere mouthful! And oats now down to forty-five
kopecks. At our place, no fear, all comers may have as
much as they can eat.’
‘The master’s a screw,’ put in the counting house clerk.
‘Well, did you like their horses?’ asked Dolly.
Anna Karenina
1388 of 1759
‘The horses!—there’s no two opinions about them.
And the food was good. But it seemed to me sort of
dreary there, Darya Alexandrovna. I don’t know what you
thought,’ he said, turning his handsome, good-natured
face to her.
‘I thought so too. Well, shall we get home by evening?’
‘Eh, we must!’
On reaching home and finding everyone entirely
satisfactory and particularly charming, Darya Alexandrovna
began with great liveliness telling them how she had
arrived, how warmly they had received her, of the luxury
and good taste in which the Vronskys lived, and of their
recreations, and she would not allow a word to be said
against them.
‘One has to know Anna and Vronsky—I have got to
know him better now—to see how nice they are, and
how touching,’ she said, speaking now with perfect
sincerity, and forgetting the vague feeling of dissatisfaction
and awkwardness she had experienced there.
Anna Karenina
1389 of 1759
Chapter 25
Vronsky and Anna spent the whole summer and part of
the winter in the country, living in just the same
condition, and still taking no steps to obtain a divorce. It
was an understood thing between them that they should
not go away anywhere; but both felt, the longer they lived
alone, especially in the autumn, without guests in the
house, that they could not stand this existence, and that
they would have to alter it.
Their life was apparently such that nothing better could
be desired. They had the fullest abundance of everything;
they had a child, and both had occupation. Anna devoted
just as much care to her appearance when they had no
visitors, and she did a great deal of reading, both of novels
and of what serious literature was in fashion. She ordered
all the books that were praised in the foreign papers and
reviews she received, and read them with that
concentrated attention which is only given to what is read
in seclusion. Moreover, every subject that was of interest
to Vronsky, she studied in books and special journals, so
that he often went straight to her with questions relating
to agriculture or architecture, sometimes even with
Anna Karenina
1390 of 1759
questions relating to horse-breeding or sport. He was
amazed at her knowledge, her memory, and at first was
disposed to doubt it, to ask for confirmation of her facts;
and she would find what he asked for in some book, and
show it to him.
The building of the hospital, too, interested her. She
did not merely assist, but planned and suggested a great
deal herself. But her chief thought was still of herself—
how far she was dear to Vronsky, how far she could make
up to him for all he had given up. Vronsky appreciated
this desire not only to please, but to serve him, which had
become the sole aim of her existence, but at the same time
he wearied of the loving snares in which she tried to hold
him fast. As time went on, and he saw himself more and
more often held fast in these snares, he had an ever
growing desire, not so much to escape from them, as to
try whether they hindered his freedom. Had it not been
for this growing desire to be free, not to have scenes every
time he wanted to go to the town to a meeting or a race,
Vronsky would have been perfectly satisfied with his life.
The role he had taken up, the role of a wealthy
landowner, one of that class which ought to be the very
heart of the Russian aristocracy, was entirely to his taste;
and now, after spending six months in that character, he
Anna Karenina
1391 of 1759
derived even greater satisfaction from it. And his
management of his estate, which occupied and absorbed
him more and more, was most successful. In spite of the
immense sums cost him by the hospital, by machinery, by
cows ordered from Switzerland, and many other things, he
was convinced that he was not wasting, but increasing his
substance. In all matters affecting income, the sales of
timber, wheat, and wool, the letting of lands, Vronsky was
hard as a rock, and knew well how to keep up prices. In
all operations on a large scale on this and his other estates,
he kept to the simplest methods involving no risk, and in
trifling details he was careful and exacting to an extreme
degree. In spite of all the cunning and ingenuity of the
German steward, who would try to tempt him into
purchases by making his original estimate always far larger
than really required, and then representing to Vronsky that
he might get the thing cheaper, and so make a profit,
Vronsky did not give in. He listened to his steward, crossexamined him, and only agreed to his suggestions when
the implement to be ordered or constructed was the very
newest, not yet known in Russia, and likely to excite
wonder. Apart from such exceptions, he resolved upon an
increased outlay only where there was a surplus, and in
making such an outlay he went into the minutest details,
Anna Karenina
1392 of 1759
and insisted on getting the very best for his money; so that
by the method on which he managed his affairs, it was
clear that he was not wasting, but increasing his substance.
In October there were the provincial elections in the
Kashinsky province, where were the estates of Vronsky,
Sviazhsky, Koznishev, Oblonsky, and a small part of
Levin’s land.
These elections were attracting public attention from
several circumstances connected with them, and also from
the people taking part in them. There had been a great
deal of talk about them, and great preparations were being
made for them. Persons who never attended the elections
were coming from Moscow, from Petersburg, and from
abroad to attend these. Vronsky had long before promised
Sviazhsky to go to them. Before the elections Sviazhsky,
who often visited Vozdvizhenskoe, drove over to fetch
Vronsky. On the day before there had been almost a
quarrel between Vronsky and Anna over this proposed
expedition. It was the very dullest autumn weather, which
is so dreary in the country, and so, preparing himself for a
struggle, Vronsky, with a hard and cold expression,
informed Anna of his departure as he had never spoken to
her before. But, to his surprise, Anna accepted the
information with great composure, and merely asked
Anna Karenina
1393 of 1759
when he would be back. He looked intently at her, at a
loss to explain this composure. She smiled at his look. He
knew that way she had of withdrawing into herself, and
knew that it only happened when she had determined
upon something without letting him know her plans. He
was afraid of this; but he was so anxious to avoid a scene
that he kept up appearances, and half sincerely believed in
what he longed to believe in—her reasonableness.
‘I hope you won’t be dull?’
‘I hope not,’ said Anna. ‘I got a box of books yesterday
from Gautier’s. No, I shan’t be dull.’
‘She’s trying to take that tone, and so much the better,’
he thought, ‘or else it would be the same thing over and
over again.’
And he set off for the elections without appealing to
her for a candid explanation. It was the first time since the
beginning of their intimacy that he had parted from her
without a full explanation. From one point of view this
troubled him, but on the other side he felt that it was
better so. ‘At first there will be, as this time, something
undefined kept back, and then she will get used to it. I any
case I can give up anything for her, but not my masculine
independence,’ he thought.