Chapter 26
In September Levin moved to Moscow for Kitty’s
confinement. He had spent a whole month in Moscow
with nothing to do, when Sergey Ivanovitch, who had
property in the Kashinsky province, and took great
interest in the question of the approaching elections, made
ready to set off to the elections. He invited his brother,
who had a vote in the Seleznevsky district, to come with
him. Levin had, moreover, to transact in Kashin some
extremely important business relating to the wardship of
land and to the receiving of certain redemption money for
his sister, who was abroad.
Levin still hesitated, but Kitty, who saw that he was
bored in Moscow, and urged him to go, on her own
authority ordered him the proper nobleman’s uniform,
costing seven pounds. And that seven pounds paid for the
uniform was the chief cause that finally decided Levin to
go. He went to Kashin....
Levin had been six days in Kashin, visiting the assembly
each day, and busily engaged about his sister’s business,
which still dragged on. The district marshals of nobility
were all occupied with the elections, and it was impossible
Anna Karenina
1395 of 1759
to get the simplest thing done that depended upon the
court of wardship. The other matter, the payment of the
sums due, was met too by difficulties. After long
negotiations over the legal details, the money was at last
ready to be paid; but the notary, a most obliging person,
could not hand over the order, because it must have the
signature of the president, and the president, though he
had not given over his duties to a deputy, was at the
elections. All these worrying negotiations, this endless
going from place to place, and talking with pleasant and
excellent people, who quite saw the unpleasantness of the
petitioner’s position, but were powerless to assist him—all
these efforts that yielded no result, led to a feeling of
misery in Levin akin to the mortifying helplessness one
experiences in dreams when one tries to use physical force.
He felt this frequently as he talked to his most goodnatured solicitor. This solicitor did, it seemed, everything
possible, and strained every nerve to get him out of his
difficulties. ‘I tell you what you might try,’ he said more
than once; ‘go to so-and-so and so-and-so,’ and the
solicitor drew up a regular plan for getting round the fatal
point that hindered everything. But he would add
immediately, ‘It’ll mean some delay, anyway, but you
might try it.’ And Levin did try, and did go. Everyone was
Anna Karenina
1396 of 1759
kind and civil, but the point evaded seemed to crop up
again in the end, and again to bar the way. What was
particularly trying, was that Levin could not make out
with whom he was struggling, to whose interest it was
that his business should not be done. That no one seemed
to know; the solicitor certainly did not know. If Levin
could have understood why, just as he saw why one can
only approach the booking office of a railway station in
single file, it would not have been so vexatious and
tiresome to him. But with the hindrances that confronted
him in his business, no one could explain why they
existed.
But Levin had changed a good deal since his marriage;
he was patient, and if he could not see why it was all
arranged like this, he told himself that he could not judge
without knowing all about it, and that most likely it must
be so, and he tried not to fret.
In attending the elections, too, and taking part in them,
he tried now not to judge, not to fall foul of them, but to
comprehend as fully as he could the question which was
so earnestly and ardently absorbing honest and excellent
men whom he respected. Since his marriage there had
been revealed to Levin so many new and serious aspects of
life that had previously, through his frivolous attitude to
Anna Karenina
1397 of 1759
them, seemed of no importance, that in the question of
the elections too he assumed and tried to find some serious
significance.
Sergey Ivanovitch explained to him the meaning and
object of the proposed revolution at the elections. The
marshal of the province in whose hands the law had placed
the control of so many important public functions—the
guardianship of wards (the very department which was
giving Levin so much trouble just now), the disposal of
large sums subscribed by the nobility of the province, the
high schools, female, male, and military, and popular
instruction on the new model, and finally, the district
council—the marshal of the province, Snetkov, was a
nobleman of the old school,—dissipating an immense
fortune, a good-hearted man, honest after his own fashion,
but utterly without any comprehension of the needs of
modern days. He always took, in every question, the side
of the nobility; he was positively antagonistic to the spread
of popular education, and he succeeded in giving a purely
party character to the district council which ought by
rights to be of such an immense importance. What was
needed was to put in his place a fresh, capable, perfectly
modern man, of contemporary ideas, and to frame their
policy so as from the rights conferred upon the nobles, not
Anna Karenina
1398 of 1759
as the nobility, but as an element of the district council, to
extract all the powers of self-government that could
possibly be derived from them. In the wealthy Kashinsky
province, which always took the lead of other provinces in
everything, there was now such a preponderance of forces
that this policy, once carried through properly there,
might serve as a model for other provinces for all Russia.
And hence the whole question was of the greatest
importance. It was proposed to elect as marshal in place of
Snetkov either Sviazhsky, or, better still, Nevyedovsky, a
former university professor, a man of remarkable
intelligence and a great friend of Sergey Ivanovitch.
The meeting was opened by the governor, who made a
speech to the nobles, urging them to elect the public
functionaries, not from regard for persons, but for the
service and welfare of their fatherland, and hoping that the
honorable nobility of the Kashinsky province would, as at
all former elections, hold their duty as sacred, and
vindicate the exalted confidence of the monarch.
When he had finished with his speech, the governor
walked out of the hall, and the noblemen noisily and
eagerly—some even enthusiastically —followed him and
thronged round him while he put on his fur coat and
conversed amicably with the marshal of the province.
Anna Karenina
1399 of 1759
Levin, anxious to see into everything and not to miss
anything, stood there too in the crowd, and heard the
governor say: ‘Please tell Marya Ivanovna my wife is very
sorry she couldn’t come to the Home.’ And thereupon the
nobles in high good-humor sorted out their fur coats and
all drove off to the cathedral.
In the cathedral Levin, lifting his hand like the rest and
repeating the words of the archdeacon, swore with most
terrible oaths to do all the governor had hoped they would
do. Church services always affected Levin, and as he
uttered the words ‘I kiss the cross,’ and glanced round at
the crowd of young and old men repeating the same, he
felt touched.
On the second and third days there was business
relating to the finances of the nobility and the female high
school, of no importance whatever, as Sergey Ivanovitch
explained, and Levin, busy seeing after his own affairs, did
not attend the meetings. On the fourth day the auditing of
the marshal’s accounts took place at the high table of the
marshal of the province. And then there occurred the first
skirmish between the new party and the old. The
committee who had been deputed to verify the accounts
reported to the meeting that all was in order. The marshal
of the province got up, thanked the nobility for their
Anna Karenina
1400 of 1759
confidence, and shed tears. The nobles gave him a loud
welcome, and shook hands with him. But at that instant a
nobleman of Sergey Ivanovitch’s party said that he had
heard that the committee had not verified the accounts,
considering such a verification an insult to the marshal of
the province. One of the members of the committee
incautiously admitted this. Then a small gentleman, very
young-looking but very malignant, began to say that it
would probably be agreeable to the marshal of the
province to give an account of his expenditures of the
public moneys, and that the misplaced delicacy of the
members of the committee was depriving him of this
moral satisfaction. Then the members of the committee
tried to withdraw their admission, and Sergey Ivanovitch
began to prove that they must logically admit either that
they had verified the accounts or that they had not, and he
developed this dilemma in detail. Sergey Ivanovitch was
answered by the spokesman of the opposite party. Then
Sviazhsky spoke, and then the malignant gentleman again.
The discussion lasted a long time and ended in nothing.
Levin was surprised that they should dispute upon this
subject so long, especially as, when he asked Sergey
Ivanovitch whether he supposed that money had been
misappropriated, Sergey Ivanovitch answered:
Anna Karenina
1401 of 1759
‘Oh, no! He’s an honest man. But those old-fashioned
methods of paternal family arrangements in the
management of provincial affairs must be broken down.’
On the fifth day came the elections of the district
marshals. It was rather a stormy day in several districts. In
the Seleznevsky district Sviazhsky was elected
unanimously without a ballot, and he gave a dinner that
evening.
Anna Karenina
1402 of 1759
Chapter 27
The sixth day was fixed for the election of the marshal
of the province.
The rooms, large and small, were full of noblemen in
all sorts of uniforms. Many had come only for that day.
Men who had not seen each other for years, some from
the Crimea, some from Petersburg, some from abroad,
met in the rooms of the Hall of Nobility. There was much
discussion around the governor’s table under the portrait
of the Tsar.
The nobles, both in the larger and the smaller rooms,
grouped themselves in camps, and from their hostile and
suspicious glances, from the silence that fell upon them
when outsiders approached a group, and from the way
that some, whispering together, retreated to the farther
corridor, it was evident that each side had secrets from the
other. In appearance the noblemen were sharply divided
into two classes: the old and the new. The old were for
the most part either in old uniforms of the nobility,
buttoned up closely, with spurs and hats, or in their own
special naval, cavalry, infantry, or official uniforms. The
uniforms of the older men were embroidered in the old-
Anna Karenina
1403 of 1759
fashioned way with epaulets on their shoulders; they were
unmistakably tight and short in the waist, as though their
wearers had grown out of them. The younger men wore
the uniform of the nobility with long waists and broad
shoulders, unbuttoned over white waistcoats, or uniforms
with black collars and with the embroidered badges of
justices of the peace. To the younger men belonged the
court uniforms that here and there brightened up the
crowd.
But the division into young and old did not correspond
with the division of parties. Some of the young men, as
Levin observed, belonged to the old party; and some of
the very oldest noblemen, on the contrary, were
whispering with Sviazhsky, and were evidently ardent
partisans of the new party.
Levin stood in the smaller room, where they were
smoking and taking light refreshments, close to his own
friends, and listening to what they were saying, he
conscientiously exerted all his intelligence trying to
understand what was said. Sergey Ivanovitch was the
center round which the others grouped themselves. He
was listening at that moment to Sviazhsky and Hliustov,
the marshal of another district, who belonged to their
party. Hliustov would not agree to go with his district to
Anna Karenina
1404 of 1759
ask Snetkov to stand, while Sviazhsky was persuading him
to do so, and Sergey Ivanovitch was approving of the plan.
Levin could not make out why the opposition was to ask
the marshal to stand whom they wanted to supersede.
Stepan Arkadyevitch, who had just been drinking and
taking some lunch, came up to them in his uniform of a
gentleman of the bedchamber, wiping his lips with a
perfumed handkerchief of bordered batiste.
‘We are placing our forces,’ he said, pulling out his
whiskers, ‘Sergey Ivanovitch!’
And listening to the conversation, he supported
Sviazhsky’s contention.
‘One district’s enough, and Sviazhsky’s obviously of the
opposition,’ he said, words evidently intelligible to all
except Levin.
‘Why, Kostya, you here too! I suppose you’re
converted, eh?’ he added, turning to Levin and drawing
his arm through his. Levin would have been glad indeed
to be converted, but could not make out what the point
was, and retreating a few steps from the speakers, he
explained to Stepan Arkadyevitch his inability to
understand why the marshal of the province should be
asked to stand.
Anna Karenina
1405 of 1759
‘O sancta simplicitas!’ said Stepan Arkadyevitch, and
briefly and clearly he explained it to Levin. If, as at
previous elections, all the districts asked the marshal of the
province to stand, then he would be elected without a
ballot. That must not be. Now eight districts had agreed to
call upon him: if two refused to do so, Snetkov might
decline to stand at all; and then the old party might choose
another of their party, which would throw them
completely out in their reckoning. But if only one district,
Sviazhsky’s, did not call upon him to stand, Snetkov
would let himself be balloted for. They were even, some
of them, going to vote for him, and purposely to let him
get a good many votes, so that the enemy might be
thrown off the scent, and when a candidate of the other
side was put up, they too might give him some votes.
Levin understood to some extent, but not fully, and would
have put a few more questions, when suddenly everyone
began talking and making a noise and they moved towards
the big room.
‘What is it? eh? whom?’ ‘No guarantee? whose? what?’
‘They won’t pass him?’ ‘No guarantee?’ ‘They won’t let
Flerov in?’ ‘Eh, because of the charge against him?’ ‘Why,
at this rate, they won’t admit anyone. It’s a swindle!’ ‘The
law!’ Levin heard exclamations on all sides, and he moved
Anna Karenina
1406 of 1759
into the big room together with the others, all hurrying
somewhere and afraid of missing something. Squeezed by
the crowding noblemen, he drew near the high table
where the marshal of the province, Sviazhsky, and the
other leaders were hotly disputing about something.
Anna Karenina
1407 of 1759
Chapter 28
Levin was standing rather far off. A nobleman breathing
heavily and hoarsely at his side, and another whose thick
boots were creaking, prevented him from hearing
distinctly. He could only hear the soft voice of the marshal
faintly, then the shrill voice of the malignant gentleman,
and then the voice of Sviazhsky. They were disputing, as
far as he could make out, as to the interpretation to be put
on the act and the exact meaning of the words: ‘liable to
be called up for trial.’
The crowd parted to make way for Sergey Ivanovitch
approaching the table. Sergey Ivanovitch, waiting till the
malignant gentleman had finished speaking, said that he
thought the best solution would be to refer to the act
itself, and asked the secretary to find the act. The act said
that in case of difference of opinion, there must be a
ballot.
Sergey Ivanovitch read the act and began to explain its
meaning, but at that point a tall, stout, round-shouldered
landowner, with dyed whiskers, in a tight uniform that cut
the back of his neck, interrupted him. He went up to the
table, and striking it with his finger ring, he shouted
Anna Karenina
1408 of 1759
loudly: ‘A ballot! Put it to the vote! No need for more
talking!’ Then several voices began to talk all at once, and
the tall nobleman with the ring, getting more and more
exasperated, shouted more and more loudly. But it was
impossible to make out what he said.
He was shouting for the very course Sergey Ivanovitch
had proposed; but it was evident that he hated him and all
his party, and this feeling of hatred spread through the
whole party and roused in opposition to it the same
vindictiveness, though in a more seemly form, on the
other side. Shouts were raised, and for a moment all was
confusion, so that the marshal of the province had to call
for order.
‘A ballot! A ballot! Every nobleman sees it! We shed
our blood for our country!... The confidence of the
monarch.... No checking the accounts of the marshal; he’s
not a cashier.... But that’s not the point.... Votes, please!
Beastly!...’ shouted furious and violent voices on all sides.
Looks and faces were even more violent and furious than
their words. They expressed the most implacable hatred.
Levin did not in the least understand what was the matter,
and he marveled at the passion with which it was disputed
whether or not the decision about Flerov should be put to
the vote. He forgot, as Sergey Ivanovitch explained to him
Anna Karenina
1409 of 1759
afterwards, this syllogism: that it was necessary for the
public good to get rid of the marshal of the province; that
to get rid of the marshal it was necessary to have a
majority of votes; that to get a majority of votes it was
necessary to secure Flerov’s right to vote; that to secure
the recognition of Flerov’s right to vote they must decide
on the interpretation to be put on the act.
‘And one vote may decide the whole question and one
must be serious and consecutive, if one wants to be of use
in public life,’ concluded Sergey Ivanovitch. But Levin
forgot all that, and it was painful to him to see all these
excellent persons, for whom he had a respect, in such an
unpleasant and vicious state of excitement. To escape from
this painful feeling he went away into the other room
where there was nobody except the waiters at the
refreshment bar. Seeing the waiters busy over washing up
the crockery and setting in order their plates and wine
glasses, seeing their calm and cheerful faces, Levin felt an
unexpected sense of relief as though he had come out of a
stuffy room into the fresh air. He began walking up and
down, looking with pleasure at the waiters. He particularly
liked the way one gray-whiskered waiter, who showed his
scorn for the other younger ones and was jeered at by
them, was teaching them how to fold up napkins properly.
Anna Karenina
1410 of 1759
Levin was just about to enter into conversation with the
old waiter, when the secretary of the court of wardship, a
little old man whose specialty it was to know all the
noblemen of the province by name and patronymic, drew
him away.
‘Please come, Konstantin Dmitrievitch,’ he said, ‘your
brother’s looking for you. They are voting on the legal
point.’
Levin walked into the room, received a white ball, and
followed his brother, Sergey Ivanovitch, to the table
where Sviazhsky was standing with a significant and
ironical face, holding his beard in his fist and sniffing at it.
Sergey Ivanovitch put his hand into the box, put the ball
somewhere, and making room for Levin, stopped. Levin
advanced, but utterly forgetting what he was to do, and
much embarrassed, he turned to Sergey Ivanovitch with
the question, ‘Where am I to put it?’ He asked this softly,
at a moment when there was talking going on near, so
that he had hoped his question would not be overheard.
But the persons speaking paused, and his improper
question was overheard. Sergey Ivanovitch frowned.
‘That is a matter for each man’s own decision,’ he said
severely.
Anna Karenina
1411 of 1759
Several people smiled. Levin crimsoned, hurriedly
thrust his hand under the cloth, and put the ball to the
right as it was in his right hand. Having put it in, he
recollected that he ought to have thrust his left hand too,
and so he thrust it in though too late, and, still more
overcome with confusion, he beat a hasty retreat into the
background.
‘A hundred and twenty-six for admission! Ninety-eight
against!’ sang out the voice of the secretary, who could not
pronounce the letter r. Then there was a laugh; a button
and two nuts were found in the box. The nobleman was
allowed the right to vote, and the new party had
conquered.
But the old party did not consider themselves
conquered. Levin heard that they were asking Snetkov to
stand, and he saw that a crowd of noblemen was
surrounding the marshal, who was saying something.
Levin went nearer. In reply Snetkov spoke of the trust the
noblemen of the province had placed in him, the affection
they had shown him, which he did not deserve, as his only
merit had been his attachment to the nobility, to whom he
had devoted twelve years of service. Several times he
repeated the words: ‘I have served to the best of my
powers with truth and good faith, I value your goodness
Anna Karenina
1412 of 1759
and thank you,’ and suddenly he stopped short from the
tears that choked him, and went out of the room.
Whether these tears came from a sense of the injustice
being done him, from his love for the nobility, or from
the strain of the position he was placed in, feeling himself
surrounded by enemies, his emotion infected the assembly,
the majority were touched, and Levin felt a tenderness for
Snetkov.
In the doorway the marshal of the province jostled
against Levin.
‘Beg pardon, excuse me, please,’ he said as to a
stranger, but recognizing Levin, he smiled timidly. It
seemed to Levin that he would have liked to say
something, but could not speak for emotion. His face and
his whole figure in his uniform with the crosses, and white
trousers striped with braid, as he moved hurriedly along,
reminded Levin of some hunted beast who sees that he is
in evil case. This expression in the marshal’s face was
particularly touching to Levin, because, only the day
before, he had been at his house about his trustee business
and had seen him in all his grandeur, a kind-hearted,
fatherly man. The big house with the old family furniture;
the rather dirty, far from stylish, but respectful footmen,
unmistakably old house serfs who had stuck to their
Anna Karenina
1413 of 1759
master; the stout, good-natured wife in a cap with lace and
a Turkish shawl, petting her pretty grandchild, her
daughter’s daughter; the young son, a sixth form high
school boy, coming home from school, and greeting his
father, kissing his big hand; the genuine, cordial words and
gestures of the old man—all this had the day before roused
an instinctive feeling of respect and sympathy in Levin.
This old man was a touching and pathetic figure to Levin
now, and he longed to say something pleasant to him.
‘So you’re sure to be our marshal again,’ he said.
‘It’s not likely,’ said the marshal, looking round with a
scared expression. ‘I’m worn out, I’m old. If there are men
younger and more deserving than I, let them serve.’
And the marshal disappeared through a side door.
The most solemn moment was at hand. They were to
proceed immediately to the election. The leaders of both
parties were reckoning white and black on their fingers.
The discussion upon Flerov had given the new party
not only Flerov’s vote, but had also gained time for them,
so that they could send to fetch three noblemen who had
been rendered unable to take part in the elections by the
wiles of the other party. Two noble gentlemen, who had a
weakness for strong drink, had been made drunk by the
Anna Karenina
1414 of 1759
partisans of Snetkov, and a third had been robbed of his
uniform.
On learning this, the new party had made haste, during
the dispute about Flerov, to send some of their men in a
sledge to clothe the stripped gentleman, and to bring along
one of the intoxicated to the meeting.
‘I’ve brought one, drenched him with water,’ said the
landowner, who had gone on this errand, to Sviazhsky.
‘He’s all right? he’ll do.’
‘Not too drunk, he won’t fall down?’ said Sviazhsky,
shaking his head.
‘No, he’s first-rate. If only they don’t give him any
more here.... I’ve told the waiter not to give him anything
on any account.’
Anna Karenina
1415 of 1759
Chapter 29
The narrow room, in which they were smoking and
taking refresh~ ments, was full of noblemen. The
excitement grew more intense, and every face betrayed
some uneasiness. The excitement was specially keen for
the leaders of each party, who knew every detail, and had
reckoned up every vote. They were the generals
organizing the approaching battle. The rest, like the rank
and file before an engagement, though they were getting
ready for the fight, sought for other distractions in the
interval. Some were lunching, standing at the bar, or
sitting at the table; others were walking up and down the
long room, smoking cigarettes, and talking with friends
whom they had not seen for a long while.
Levin did not care to eat, and he was not smoking; he
did not want to join his own friends, that is Sergey
Ivanovitch, Stepan Arkadyevitch, Sviazhsky and the rest,
because Vronsky in his equerry’s uniform was standing
with them in eager conversation. Levin had seen him
already at the meeting on the previous day, and he had
studiously avoided him, not caring to greet him. He went
to the window and sat down, scanning the groups, and
Anna Karenina
1416 of 1759
listening to what was being said around him. He felt
depressed, especially because everyone else was, as he saw,
eager, anxious, and interested, and he alone, with an old,
toothless little man with mumbling lips wearing a naval
uniform, sitting beside him, had no interest in it and
nothing to do.
‘He’s such a blackguard! I have told him so, but it
makes no difference. Only think of it! He couldn’t collect
it in three years!’ he heard vigorously uttered by a roundshouldered, short, country gentleman, who had pomaded
hair hanging on his embroidered collar, and new boots
obviously put on for the occasion, with heels that tapped
energetically as he spoke. Casting a displeased glance at
Levin, this gentleman sharply turned his back.
‘Yes, it’s a dirty business, there’s no denying,’ a small
gentleman assented in a high voice.
Next, a whole crowd of country gentlemen,
surrounding a stout general, hurriedly came near Levin.
These persons were unmistakably seeking a place where
they could talk without being overheard.
‘How dare he say I had his breeches stolen! Pawned
them for drink, I expect. Damn the fellow, prince indeed!
He’d better not say it, the beast!’
Anna Karenina
1417 of 1759
‘But excuse me! They take their stand on the act,’ was
being said in another group; ‘the wife must be registered as
noble.’
‘Oh, damn your acts! I speak from my heart. We’re all
gentlemen, aren’t we? Above suspicion.’
‘Shall we go on, your excellency, fine champagne?’
Another group was following a nobleman, who was
shouting something in a loud voice; it was one of the
three intoxicated gentlemen.
‘I always advised Marya Semyonovna to let for a fair
rent, for she can never save a profit,’ he heard a pleasant
voice say. The speaker was a country gentleman with gray
whiskers, wearing the regimental uniform of an old
general staff-officer. It was the very landowner Levin had
met at Sviazhsky’s. He knew him at once. The landowner
too stared at Levin, and they exchanged greetings. ‘Very
glad to see you! To be sure! I remember you very well.
Last year at our district marshal, Nikolay Ivanovitch’s.’
‘Well, and how is your land doing?’ asked Levin.
‘Oh, still just the same, always at a loss,’ the landowner
answered with a resigned smile, but with an expression of
serenity and conviction that so it must be. ‘And how do
you come to be in our province?’ he asked. ‘Come to take
part in our coup d’etat?’ he said, confidently pronouncing
Anna Karenina
1418 of 1759
the French words with a bad accent. ‘All Russia’s here—
gentlemen of the bedchamber, and everything short of the
ministry.’ He pointed to the imposing figure of Stepan
Arkadyevitch in white trousers and his court uniform,
walking by with a general.
‘I ought to own that I don’t very well understand the
drift of the provincial elections,’ said Levin.
The landowner looked at him.
‘Why, what is there to understand? There’s no meaning
in it at all. It’s a decaying institution that goes on running
only by the force of inertia. Just look, the very uniforms
tell you that it’s an assembly of justices of the peace,
permanent members of the court, and so on, but not of
noblemen.’
‘Then why do you come?’ asked Levin.
‘From habit, nothing else. Then, too, one must keep
up connections. It’s a moral obligation of a sort. And then,
to tell the truth, there’s one’s own interests. My son-inlaw wants to stand as a permanent member; they’re not
rich people, and he must be brought forward. These
gentlemen, now, what do they come for?’ he said,
pointing to the malignant gentleman, who was talking at
the high table.
‘That’s the new generation of nobility.’
Anna Karenina
1419 of 1759
‘New it may be, but nobility it isn’t. They’re
proprietors of a sort, but we’re the landowners. As
noblemen, they’re cutting their own throats.’
‘But you say it’s an institution that’s served its time.’
‘That it may be, but still it ought to be treated a little
more respectfully. Snetkov, now...We may be of use, or
we may not, but we’re the growth of a thousand years. If
we’re laying out a garden, planning one before the house,
you know, and there you’ve a tree that’s stood for
centuries in the very spot.... Old and gnarled it may be,
and yet you don’t cut down the old fellow to make room
for the flowerbeds, but lay out your beds so as to take
advantage of the tree. You won’t grow him again in a
year,’ he said cautiously, and he immediately changed the
conversation. ‘Well, and how is your land doing?’
‘Oh, not very well. I make five per cent.’
‘Yes, but you don’t reckon your own work. Aren’t you
worth something too? I’ll tell you my own case. Before I
took to seeing after the land, I had a salary of three
hundred pounds from the service. Now I do more work
than I did in the service, and like you I get five per cent
on the land, and thank God for that. But one’s work is
thrown in for nothing.’
‘Then why do you do it, if it’s a clear loss?’
Anna Karenina
1420 of 1759
‘Oh, well, one does it! What would you have? It’s
habit, and one knows it’s how it should be. And what’s
more,’ the landowner went on, leaning his elbows on the
window and chatting on, ‘my son, I must tell you, has no
taste for it. There’s no doubt he’ll be a scientific man. So
there’ll be no one to keep it up. And yet one does it. Here
this year I’ve planted an orchard.’
‘Yes, yes,’ said Levin, ‘that’s perfectly true. I always feel
there’s no real balance of gain in my work on the land,
and yet one does it.... It’s a sort of duty one feels to the
land.’
‘But I tell you what,’ the landowner pursued; ‘a
neighbor of mine, a merchant, was at my place. We
walked about the fields and the garden. ‘No,’ said he,
‘Stepan Vassilievitch, everything’s well looked after, but
your garden’s neglected.’ But, as a fact, it’s well kept up.
‘To my thinking, I’d cut down that lime-tree. Here
you’ve thousands of limes, and each would make two
good bundles of bark. And nowadays that bark’s worth
something. I’d cut down the lot.’ ‘
‘And with what he made he’d increase his stock, or buy
some land for a trifle, and let it out in lots to the peasants,’
Levin added, smiling. He had evidently more than once
come across those commercial calculations. ‘And he’d
Anna Karenina
1421 of 1759
make his fortune. But you and I must thank God if we
keep what we’ve got and leave it to our children.’
‘You’re married, I’ve heard?’ said the landowner.
‘Yes,’ Levin answered, with proud satisfaction. ‘Yes, it’s
rather strange,’ he went on. ‘So we live without making
anything, as though we were ancient vestals set to keep in
a fire.’
The landowner chuckled under his white mustaches.
‘There are some among us, too, like our friend Nikolay
Ivanovitch, or Count Vronsky, that’s settled here lately,
who try to carry on their husbandry as though it were a
factory; but so far it leads to nothing but making away
with capital on it.’
‘But why is it we don’t do like the merchants? Why
don’t we cut down our parks for timber?’ said Levin,
returning to a thought that had struck him.
‘Why, as you said, to keep the fire in. Besides that’s not
work for a nobleman. And our work as noblemen isn’t
done here at the elections, but yonder, each in our corner.
There’s a class instinct, too, of what one ought and
oughtn’t to do. There’s the peasants, too, I wonder at
them sometimes; any good peasant tries to take all the land
he can. However bad the land is, he’ll work it. Without a
return too. At a simple loss.’
Anna Karenina
1422 of 1759
‘Just as we do,’ said Levin. ‘Very, very glad to have met
you,’ he added, seeing Sviazhsky approaching him.
‘And here we’ve met for the first time since we met at
your place,’ said the landowner to Sviazhsky, ‘and we’ve
had a good talk too.’
‘Well, have you been attacking the new order of
things?’ said Sviazhsky with a smile.
‘That we’re bound to do.’
‘You’ve relieved your feelings?’
Anna Karenina
1423 of 1759
Chapter 30
Sviazhsky took Levin’s arm, and went with him to his
own friends. This time there was no avoiding Vronsky.
He was standing with Stepan Arkadyevitch and Sergey
Ivanovitch, and looking straight at Levin as he drew near.
‘Delighted! I believe I’ve had the pleasure of meeting
you...at Princess Shtcherbatskaya’s,’ he said, giving Levin
his hand.
‘Yes, I quite remember our meeting,’ said Levin, and
blushing crimson, he turned away immediately, and began
talking to his brother.
With a slight smile Vronsky went on talking to
Sviazhsky, obviously without the slightest inclination to
enter into conversation with Levin. But Levin, as he
talked to his brother, was continually looking round at
Vronsky, trying to think of something to say to him to
gloss over his rudeness.
‘What are we waiting for now?’ asked Levin, looking at
Sviazhsky and Vronsky.
‘For Snetkov. He has to refuse or to consent to stand,’
answered Sviazhsky.
‘Well, and what has he done, consented or not?’
Anna Karenina
1424 of 1759
‘That’s the point, that he’s done neither,’ said Vronsky.
‘And if he refuses, who will stand then?’ asked Levin,
looking at Vronsky.
‘Whoever chooses to,’ said Sviazhsky.
‘Shall you?’ asked Levin.
‘Certainly not I,’ said Sviazhsky, looking confused, and
turning an alarmed glance at the malignant gentleman,
who was standing beside Sergey Ivanovitch.
‘Who then? Nevyedovsky?’ said Levin, feeling he was
putting his foot into it.
But this was worse still. Nevyedovsky and Sviazhsky
were the two candidates.
‘I certainly shall not, under any circumstances,’
answered the malignant gentleman.
This was Nevyedovsky himself. Sviazhsky introduced
him to Levin.
‘Well, you find it exciting too?’ said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, winking at Vronsky. ‘It’s something like a
race. One might bet on it.’
‘Yes, it is keenly exciting,’ said Vronsky. ‘And once
taking the thing up, one’s eager to see it through. It’s a
fight!’ he said, scowling and setting his powerful jaws.
‘What a capable fellow Sviazhsky is! Sees it all so
clearly.’
Anna Karenina
1425 of 1759
‘Oh, yes!’ Vronsky assented indifferently.
A silence followed, during which Vronsky—since he
had to look at something—looked at Levin, at his feet, at
his uniform, then at his face, and noticing his gloomy eyes
fixed upon him, he said, in order to say something:
‘How is it that you, living constantly in the country,
are not a justice of the peace? You are not in the uniform
of one.’
‘It’s because I consider that the justice of the peace is a
silly institution,’ Levin answered gloomily. He had been
all the time looking for an opportunity to enter into
conversation with Vronsky, so as to smooth over his
rudeness at their first meeting.
‘I don’t think so, quite the contrary,’ Vronsky said,
with quiet surprise.
‘It’s a plaything,’ Levin cut him short. ‘We don’t want
justices of the peace. I’ve never had a single thing to do
with them during eight years. And what I have had was
decided wrongly by them. The justice of the peace is over
thirty miles from me. For some matter of two roubles I
should have to send a lawyer, who costs me fifteen.’
And he related how a peasant had stolen some flour
from the miller, and when the miller told him of it, had
lodged a complaint for slander. All this was utterly
Anna Karenina
1426 of 1759
uncalled for and stupid, and Levin felt it himself as he said
it.
‘Oh, this is such an original fellow!’ said Stepan
Arkadyevitch with his most soothing, almond-oil smile.
‘But come along; I think they’re voting...’
And they separated.
‘I can’t understand,’ said Sergey Ivanovitch, who had
observed his brother’s clumsiness, ‘I can’t understand how
anyone can be so absolutely devoid of political tact. That’s
where we Russians are so deficient. The marshal of the
province is our opponent, and with him you’re ami
cochon, and you beg him to stand. Count Vronsky, now
...I’m not making a friend of him; he’s asked me to dinner,
and I’m not going; but he’s one of our side—why make
an enemy of him? Then you ask Nevyedovsky if he’s
going to stand. That’s not a thing to do.’
‘Oh, I don’t understand it at all! And it’s all such
nonsense,’ Levin answered gloomily.
‘You say it’s all such nonsense, but as soon as you have
anything to do with it, you make a muddle.’
Levin did not answer, and they walked together into
the big room.
The marshal of the province, though he was vaguely
conscious in the air of some trap being prepared for him,
Anna Karenina
1427 of 1759
and though he had not been called upon by all to stand,
had still made up his mind to stand. All was silence in the
room. The secretary announced in a loud voice that the
captain of the guards, Mihail Stepanovitch Snetkov, would
now be balloted for as marshal of the province.
The district marshals walked carrying plates, on which
were balls, from their tables to the high table, and the
election began.
‘Put it in the right side,’ whispered Stepan
Arkadyevitch, as with his brother Levin followed the
marshal of his district to the table. But Levin had forgotten
by now the calculations that had been explained to him,
and was afraid Stepan Arkadyevitch might be mistaken in
saying ‘the right side.’ Surely Snetkov was the enemy. As
he went up, he held the ball in his right hand, but
thinking he was wrong, just at the box he changed to the
left hand, and undoubtedly put the ball to the left. An
adept in the business, standing at the box and seeing by the
mere action of the elbow where each put his ball, scowled
with annoyance. It was no good for him to use his insight.
Everything was still, and the counting of the balls was
heard. Then a single voice rose and proclaimed the
numbers for and against. The marshal had been voted for
by a considerable majority. All was noise and eager
Anna Karenina
1428 of 1759
movement towards the doors. Snetkov came in, and the
nobles thronged round him, congratulating him.
‘Well, now is it over?’ Levin asked Sergey Ivanovitch.
‘It’s only just beginning,’ Sviazhsky said, replying for
Sergey Ivanovitch with a smile. ‘Some other candidate
may receive more votes than the marshal.’
Levin had quite forgotten about that. Now he could
only remember that there was some sort of trickery in it,
but he was too bored to think what it was exactly. He felt
depressed, and longed to get out of the crowd.
As no one was paying any attention to him, and no one
apparently needed him, he quietly slipped away into the
little room where the refreshments were, and again had a
great sense of comfort when he saw the waiters. The little
old waiter pressed him to have something, and Levin
agreed. After eating a cutlet with beans and talking to the
waiters of their former masters, Levin, not wishing to go
back to the hall, where it was all so distasteful to him,
proceeded to walk through the galleries. The galleries
were full of fashionably dressed ladies, leaning over the
balustrade and trying not to lose a single word of what was
being said below. With the ladies were sitting and standing
smart lawyers, high school teachers in spectacles, and
officers. Everywhere they were talking of the election, and
Anna Karenina
1429 of 1759
of how worried the marshal was, and how splendid the
discussions had been. In one group Levin heard his
brother’s praises. One lady was telling a lawyer:
‘How glad I am I heard Koznishev! It’s worth losing
one’s dinner. He’s exquisite! So clear and distinct all of it!
There’s not one of you in the law courts that speaks like
that. The only one is Meidel, and he’s not so eloquent by
a long way.’
Finding a free place, Levin leaned over the balustrade
and began looking and listening.
All the noblemen were sitting railed off behind barriers
according to their districts. In the middle of the room
stood a man in a uniform, who shouted in a loud, high
voice:
‘As a candidate for the marshalship of the nobility of
the province we call upon staff-captain Yevgeney
Ivanovitch Apuhtin!’ A dead silence followed, and then a
weak old voice was heard: ‘Declined!’
‘We call upon the privy councilor Pyotr Petrovitch
Bol,’ the voice began again.
‘Declined!’ a high boyish voice replied.
Again it began, and again ‘Declined.’ And so it went on
for about an hour. Levin, with his elbows on the
balustrade, looked and listened. At first he wondered and
Anna Karenina
1430 of 1759
wanted to know what it meant; then feeling sure that he
could not make it out he began to be bored. Then
recalling all the excitement and vindictiveness he had seen
on all the faces, he felt sad; he made up his mind to go,
and went downstairs. As he passed through the entry to
the galleries he met a dejected high school boy walking up
and down with tired-looking eyes. On the stairs he met a
couple—a lady running quickly on her high heels and the
jaunty deputy prosecutor.
‘I told you you weren’t late,’ the deputy prosecutor was
saying at the moment when Levin moved aside to let the
lady pass.
Levin was on the stairs to the way out, and was just
feeling in his waistcoat pocket for the number of his
overcoat, when the secretary overtook him.
‘This way, please, Konstantin Dmitrievitch; they are
voting.’
The candidate who was being voted on was
Nevyedovsky, who had so stoutly denied all idea of
standing. Levin went up to the door of the room; it was
locked. The secretary knocked, the door opened, and
Levin was met by two red-faced gentlemen, who darted
out.
Anna Karenina
1431 of 1759
‘I can’t stand any more of it,’ said one red-faced
gentleman.
After them the face of the marshal of the province was
poked out. His face was dreadful-looking from exhaustion
and dismay.
‘I told you not to let any one out!’ he cried to the
doorkeeper.
‘I let someone in, your excellency!’
‘Mercy on us!’ and with a heavy sigh the marshal of the
province walked with downcast head to the high table in
the middle of the room, his legs staggering in his white
trousers.
Nevyedovsky had scored a higher majority, as they had
planned, and he was the new marshal of the province.
Many people were amused, many were pleased and happy,
many were in ecstasies, many were disgusted and unhappy.
The former marshal of the province was in a state of
despair, which he could not conceal. When Nevyedovsky
went out of the room, the crowd thronged round him and
followed him enthusiastically, just as they had followed the
governor who had opened the meetings, and just as they
had followed Snetkov when he was elected.
Anna Karenina
1432 of 1759
Chapter 31
The newly elected marshal and many of the successful
party dined that day with Vronsky.
Vronsky had come to the elections partly because he
was bored in the country and wanted to show Anna his
right to independence, and also to repay Sviazhsky by his
support at the election for all the trouble he had taken for
Vronsky at the district council election, but chiefly in
order strictly to perform all those duties of a nobleman and
landowner which he had taken upon himself. But he had
not in the least expected that the election would so
interest him, so keenly excite him, and that he would be
so good at this kind of thing. He was quite a new man in
the circle of the nobility of the province, but his success
was unmistakable, and he was not wrong in supposing that
he had already obtained a certain influence. This influence
was due to his wealth and reputation, the capital house in
the town lent him by his old friend Shirkov, who had a
post in the department of finances and was director of a
nourishing bank in Kashin; the excellent cook Vronsky
had brought from the country, and his friendship with the
governor, who was a schoolfellow of Vronsky’s—a
Anna Karenina
1433 of 1759
schoolfellow he had patronized and protected indeed. But
what contributed more than all to his success was his
direct, equable manner with everyone, which very quickly
made the majority of the noblemen reverse the current
opinion of his supposed haughtiness. He was himself
conscious that, except that whimsical gentleman married
to Kitty Shtcherbatskaya, who had a propos de bottes
poured out a stream of irrelevant absurdities with such
spiteful fury, every nobleman with whom he had made
acquaintance had become his adherent. He saw clearly,
and other people recognized it, too, that he had done a
great deal to secure the success of Nevyedovsky. And now
at his own table, celebrating Nevyedovsky’s election, he
was experiencing an agreeable sense of triumph over the
success of his candidate. The election itself had so
fascinated him that, if he could succeed in getting married
during the next three years, he began to think of standing
himself—much as after winning a race ridden by a jockey,
he had longed to ride a race himself.
Today he was celebrating the success of his jockey.
Vronsky sat at the head of the table, on his right hand sat
the young governor, a general of high rank. To all the rest
he was the chief man in the province, who had solemnly
opened the elections with his speech, and aroused a feeling
Anna Karenina
1434 of 1759
of respect and even of awe in many people, as Vronsky
saw; to Vronsky he was little Katka Maslov—that had
been his nickname in the Pages’ Corps—whom he felt to
be shy and tried to mettre a son aise. On the left hand sat
Nevyedovsky with his youthful, stubborn, and malignant
face. With him Vronsky was simple and deferential.
Sviazhsky took his failure very light-heartedly. It was
indeed no failure in his eyes, as he said himself, turning,
glass in hand, to Nevyedovsky; they could not have found
a better representative of the new movement, which the
nobility ought to follow. And so every honest person, as
he said, was on the side of today’s success and was
rejoicing over it.
Stepan Arkadyevitch was glad, too, that he was having
a good time, and that everyone was pleased. The episode
of the elections served as a good occasion for a capital
dinner. Sviazhsky comically imitated the tearful discourse
of the marshal, and observed, addressing Nevyedovsky,
that his excellency would have to select another more
complicated method of auditing the accounts than tears.
Another nobleman jocosely described how footmen in
stockings had been ordered for the marshal’s ball, and how
now they would have to be sent back unless the new
marshal would give a ball with footmen in stockings.
Anna Karenina
1435 of 1759
Continually during dinner they said of Nevyedovsky:
‘our marshal,’ and ‘your excellency.’
This was said with the same pleasure with which a
bride is called ‘Madame’ and her husband’s name.
Nevyedovsky affected to be not merely indifferent but
scornful of this appellation, but it was obvious that he was
highly delighted, and had to keep a curb on himself not to
betray the triumph which was unsuitable to their new
liberal tone.
After dinner several telegrams were sent to people
interested in the result of the election. And Stepan
Arkadyevitch, who was in high good humor, sent Darya
Alexandrovna a telegram: ‘Nevyedovsky elected by twenty
votes. Congratulations. Tell people.’ He dictated it aloud,
saying: ‘We must let them share our rejoicing.’ Darya
Alexandrovna, getting the message, simply sighed over the
rouble wasted on it, and understood that it was an afterdinner affair. She knew Stiva had a weakness after dining
for faire jouer le telegraphe.
Everything, together with the excellent dinner and the
wine, not from Russian merchants, but imported direct
from abroad, was extremely dignified, simple, and
enjoyable. The party—some twenty—had been selected
by Sviazhsky from among the more active new liberals, all
Anna Karenina
1436 of 1759
of the same way of thinking, who were at the same time
clever and well bred. They drank, also half in jest, to the
health of the new marshal of the province, of the
governor, of the bank director, and of ‘our amiable host.’
Vronsky was satisfied. He had never expected to find so
pleasant a tone in the provinces.
Towards the end of dinner it was still more lively. The
governor asked Vronsky to come to a concert for the
benefit of the Servians which his wife, who was anxious to
make his acquaintance, had been getting up.
‘There’ll be a ball, and you’ll see the belle of the
province. Worth seeing, really.’
‘Not in my line,’ Vronsky answered. He liked that
English phrase. But he smiled, and promised to come.
Before they rose from the table, when all of them were
smoking, Vronsky’s valet went up to him with a letter on
a tray.
‘From Vozdvizhenskoe by special messenger,’ he said
with a significant expression.
‘Astonishing! how like he is to the deputy prosecutor
Sventitsky,’ said one of the guests in French of the valet,
while Vronsky, frowning, read the letter.
The letter was from Anna. Before he read the letter, he
knew its contents. Expecting the elections to be over in
Anna Karenina
1437 of 1759
five days, he had promised to be back on Friday. Today
was Saturday, and he knew that the letter contained
reproaches for not being back at the time fixed. The letter
he had sent the previous evening had probably not
reached her yet.
The letter was what he had expected, but the form of it
was unexpected, and particularly disagreeable to him.
‘Annie is very ill, the doctor says it may be inflammation. I
am losing my head all alone. Princess Varvara is no help,
but a hindrance. I expected you the day before yesterday,
and yesterday, and now I am sending to find out where
you are and what you are doing. I wanted to come myself,
but thought better of it, knowing you would dislike it.
Send some answer, that I may know what to do.’
The child ill, yet she had thought of coming herself.
Their daughter ill, and this hostile tone.
The innocent festivities over the election, and this
gloomy, burdensome love to which he had to return
struck Vronsky by their contrast. But he had to go, and by
the first train that night he set off home.
Anna Karenina
1438 of 1759
Chapter 32
Before Vronsky’s departure for the elections, Anna had
reflected that the scenes constantly repeated between them
each time he left home, might only make him cold to her
instead of attaching him to her, and resolved to do all she
could to control herself so as to bear the parting with
composure. But the cold, severe glance with which he had
looked at her when he came to tell her he was going had
wounded her, and before he had started her peace of mind
was destroyed.
In solitude afterwards, thinking over that glance which
had expressed his right to freedom, she came, as she always
did, to the same point—the sense of her own humiliation.
‘He has the right to go away when and where he chooses.
Not simply to go away, but to leave me. He has every
right, and I have none. But knowing that, he ought not to
do it. What has he done, though?... He looked at me with
a cold, severe expression. Of course that is something
indefinable, impalpable, but it has never been so before,
and that glance means a great deal,’ she thought. ‘That
glance shows the beginning of indifference.’
Anna Karenina
1439 of 1759
And though she felt sure that a coldness was beginning,
there was nothing she could do, she could not in any way
alter her relations to him. Just as before, only by love and
by charm could she keep him. And so, just as before, only
by occupation in the day, by morphine at night, could she
stifle the fearful thought of what would be if he ceased to
love her. It is true there was still one means; not to keep
him—for that she wanted nothing more than his love—
but to be nearer to him, to be in such a position that he
would not leave her. That means was divorce and
marriage. And she began to long for that, and made up her
mind to agree to it the first time he or Stiva approached
her on the subject.
Absorbed in such thoughts, she passed five days
without him, the five days that he was to be at the
elections.
Walks, conversation with Princess Varvara, visits to the
hospital, and, most of all, reading—reading of one book
after another—filled up her time. But on the sixth day,
when the coachman came back without him, she felt that
now she was utterly incapable of stifling the thought of
him and of what he was doing there, just at that time her
little girl was taken ill. Anna began to look after her, but
even that did not distract her mind, especially as the illness
Anna Karenina
1440 of 1759
was not serious. However hard she tried, she could not
love this little child, and to feign love was beyond her
powers. Towards the evening of that day, still alone, Anna
was in such a panic about him that she decided to start for
the town, but on second thoughts wrote him the
contradictory letter that Vronsky received, and without
reading it through, sent it off by a special messenger. The
next morning she received his letter and regretted her
own. She dreaded a repetition of the severe look he had
flung at her at parting, especially when he knew that the
baby was not dangerously ill. But still she was glad she had
written to him. At this moment Anna was positively
admitting to herself that she was a burden to him, that he
would relinquish his freedom regretfully to return to her,
and in spite of that she was glad he was coming. Let him
weary of her, but he would be here with her, so that she
would see him, would know of every action he took.
She was sitting in the drawing room near a lamp, with
a new volume of Taine, and as she read, listening to the
sound of the wind outside, and every minute expecting
the carriage to arrive. Several times she had fancied she
heard the sound of wheels, but she had been mistaken. At
last she heard not the sound of wheels, but the coachman’s
shout and the dull rumble in the covered entry. Even
Anna Karenina
1441 of 1759
Princess Varvara, playing patience, confirmed this, and
Anna, flushing hotly, got up; but instead of going down,
as she had done twice before, she stood still. She suddenly
felt ashamed of her duplicity, but even more she dreaded
how he might meet her. All feeling of wounded pride had
passed now; she was only afraid of the expression of his
displeasure. She remembered that her child had been
perfectly well again for the last two days. She felt
positively vexed with her for getting better from the very
moment her letter was sent off. Then she thought of him,
that he was here, all of him, with his hands, his eyes. She
heard his voice. And forgetting everything, she ran
joyfully to meet him.
‘Well, how is Annie?’ he said timidly from below,
looking up to Anna as she ran down to him.
He was sitting on a chair, and a footman was pulling off
his warm over-boot.
‘Oh, she is better.’
‘And you?’ he said, shaking himself.
she took his hand in both of hers, and drew it to her
waist, never taking her eyes off him.
‘Well, I’m glad,’ he said, coldly scanning her, her hair,
her dress, which he knew she had put on for him. All was
charming, but how many times it had charmed him! And
Anna Karenina
1442 of 1759
the stern, stony expression that she so dreaded settled upon
his face.
‘Well, I’m glad. And are you well?’ he said, wiping his
damp beard with his handkerchief and kissing her hand.
‘Never mind,’ she thought, ‘only let him be here, and
so long as he’s here he cannot, he dare not, cease to love
me.’
The evening was spent happily and gaily in the
presence of Princess Varvara, who complained to him that
Anna had been taking morphine in his absence.
‘What am I to do? I couldn’t sleep.... My thoughts
prevented me. When he’s here I never take it—hardly
ever.’
He told her about the election, and Anna knew how
by adroit questions to bring him to what gave him most
pleasure—his own success. She told him of everything that
interested him at home; and all that she told him was of
the most cheerful description.
But late in the evening, when they were alone, Anna,
seeing that she had regained complete possession of him,
wanted to erase the painful impression of the glance he
had given her for her letter. She said:
‘Tell me frankly, you were vexed at getting my letter,
and you didn’t believe me?’
Anna Karenina
1443 of 1759
As soon as she had said it, she felt that however warm
his feelings were to her, he had not forgiven her for that.
‘Yes,’ he said, ‘the letter was so strange. First, Annie ill,
and then you thought of coming yourself.’
‘It was all the truth.’
‘Oh, I don’t doubt it.’
‘Yes, you do doubt it. You are vexed, I see.’
‘Not for one moment. I’m only vexed, that’s true, that
you seem somehow unwilling to admit that there are
duties..’
‘The duty of going to a concert..’
‘But we won’t talk about it,’ he said.
‘Why not talk about it?’ she said.
‘I only meant to say that matters of real importance
may turn up. Now, for instance, I shall have to go to
Moscow to arrange about the house.... Oh, Anna, why are
you so irritable? Don’t you know that I can’t live without
you?’
‘If so,’ said Anna, her voice suddenly changing, ‘it
means that you are sick of this life.... Yes, you will come
for a day and go away, as men do..’
‘Anna, that’s cruel. I am ready to give up my whole
life.’
But she did not hear him.
Anna Karenina
1444 of 1759
‘If you go to Moscow, I will go too. I will not stay
here. Either we must separate or else live together.’
‘Why, you know, that’s my one desire. But for that..’
‘We must get a divorce. I will write to him. I see I
cannot go on like this.... But I will come with you to
Moscow.’
‘You talk as if you were threatening me. But I desire
nothing so much as never to be parted from you,’ said
Vronsky, smiling.
But as he said these words there gleamed in his eyes not
merely a cold look, but the vindictive look of a man
persecuted and made cruel.
She saw the look and correctly divined its meaning.
‘If so, it’s a calamity!’ that glance told her. It was a
moment’s impression, but she never forgot it.
Anna wrote to her husband asking him about a divorce,
and towards the end of November, taking leave of
Princess Varvara, who wanted to go to Petersburg, she
went with Vronsky to Moscow. Expecting every day an
answer from Alexey Alexandrovitch, and after that the
divorce, they now established themselves together like
married people.
Anna Karenina
1445 of 1759
PART SEVEN
Anna Karenina
1446 of 1759
Chapter 1
The Levins had been three months in Moscow. The
date had long passed on which, according to the most
trustworthy calculations of people learned in such matters,
Kitty should have been confined. But she was still about,
and there was nothing to show that her time was any
nearer than two months ago. The doctor, the monthly
nurse, and Dolly and her mother, and most of all Levin,
who could not think of the approaching event without
terror, began to be impatient and uneasy. Kitty was the
only person who felt perfectly calm and happy.
She was distinctly conscious now of the birth of a new
feeling of love for the future child, for her to some extent
actually existing already, and she brooded blissfully over
this feeling. He was not by now altogether a part of
herself, but sometimes lived his own life independently of
her. Often this separate being gave her pain, but at the
same time she wanted to laugh with a strange new joy.
All the people she loved were with her, and all were so
good to her, so attentively caring for her, so entirely
pleasant was everything presented to her, that if she had
not known and felt that it must all soon be over, she could
not have wished for a better and pleasanter life. The only
Anna Karenina
1447 of 1759
thing that spoiled the charm of this manner of life was that
her husband was not here as she loved him to be, and as
he was in the country.
She liked his serene, friendly, and hospitable manner in
the country. In the town he seemed continually uneasy
and on his guard, as though he were afraid someone
would be rude to him, and still more to her. At home in
the country, knowing himself distinctly to be in his right
place, he was never in haste to be off elsewhere. He was
never unoccupied. Here in town he was in a continual
hurry, as though afraid of missing something, and yet he
had nothing to do. And she felt sorry for him. To others,
she knew, he did not appear an object of pity. On the
contrary, when Kitty looked at him in society, as one
sometimes looks at those one loves, trying to see him as if
he were a stranger, so as to catch the impression he must
make on others, she saw with a panic even of jealous fear
that he was far indeed from being a pitiable figure, that he
was very attractive with his fine breeding, his rather oldfashioned, reserved courtesy with women, his powerful
figure, and striking, as she thought, and expressive face.
But she saw him not from without, but from within; she
saw that here he was not himself; that was the only way
she could define his condition to herself. Sometimes she
Anna Karenina
1448 of 1759
inwardly reproached him for his inability to live in the
town; sometimes she recognized that it was really hard for
him to order his life here so that he could be satisfied with.
What had he to do, indeed? He did not care for cards;
he did not go to a club. Spending the time with jovial
gentlemen of Oblonsky’s type—she knew now what that
meant...it meant drinking and going somewhere after
drinking. She could not think without horror of where
men went on such occasions. Was he to go into society?
But she knew he could only find satisfaction in that if he
took pleasure in the society of young women, and that she
could not wish for. Should he stay at home with her, her
mother and her sisters? But much as she liked and enjoyed
their conversations forever on the same subjects—‘AlineNadine,’ as the old prince called the sisters’ talks—she
knew it must bore him. What was there left for him to
do? To go on writing at his book he had indeed
attempted, and at first he used to go to the library and
make extracts and look up references for his book. But, as
he told her, the more he did nothing, the less time he had
to do anything. And besides, he complained that he had
talked too much about his book here, and that
consequently all his ideas about it were muddled and had
lost their interest for him.
Anna Karenina
1449 of 1759
One advantage in this town life was that quarrels hardly
ever happened between them here in town. Whether it
was that their conditions were different, or that they had
both become more careful and sensible in that respect,
they had no quarrels in Moscow from jealousy, which
they had so dreaded when they moved from the country.
One event, an event of great importance to both from
that point of view, did indeed happen—that was Kitty’s
meeting with Vronsky.
The old Princess Marya Borissovna, Kitty’s godmother,
who had always been very fond of her, had insisted on
seeing her. Kitty, though she did not go into society at all
on account of her condition, went with her father to see
the venerable old lady, and there met Vronsky.
The only thing Kitty could reproach herself for at this
meeting was that at the instant when she recognized in his
civilian dress the features once so familiar to her, her
breath failed her, the blood rushed to her heart, and a
vivid blush—she felt it— overspread her face. But this
lasted only a few seconds. Before her father, who
purposely began talking in a loud voice to Vronsky, had
finished, she was perfectly ready to look at Vronsky, to
speak to him, if necessary, exactly as she spoke to Princess
Marya Borissovna, and more than that, to do so in such a
Anna Karenina
1450 of 1759
way that everything to the faintest intonation and smile
would have been approved by her husband, whose unseen
presence she seemed to feel about her at that instant.
She said a few words to him, even smiled serenely at
his joke about the elections, which he called ‘our
parliament.’ (She had to smile to show she saw the joke.)
But she turned away immediately to Princess Marya
Borissovna, and did not once glance at him till he got up
to go; then she looked at him, but evidently only because
it would be uncivil not to look at a man when he is saying
good-bye.
She was grateful to her father for saying nothing to her
about their meeting Vronsky, but she saw by his special
warmth to her after the visit during their usual walk that
he was pleased with her. She was pleased with herself. She
had not expected she would have had the power, while
keeping somewhere in the bottom of her heart all the
memories of her old feeling for Vronsky, not only to seem
but to be perfectly indifferent and composed with him.
Levin flushed a great deal more than she when she told
him she had met Vronsky at Princess Marya Borissovna’s.
It was very hard for her to tell him this, but still harder to
go on speaking of the details of the meeting, as he did not
question her, but simply gazed at her with a frown.
Anna Karenina
1451 of 1759
‘I am very sorry you weren’t there,’ she said. ‘Not that
you weren’t in the room...I couldn’t have been so natural
in your presence...I am blushing now much more, much,
much more,’ she said, blushing till the tears came into her
eyes. ‘But that you couldn’t see through a crack.’
The truthful eyes told Levin that she was satisfied with
herself, and in spite of her blushing he was quickly
reassured and began questioning her, which was all she
wanted. When he had heard everything, even to the detail
that for the first second she could not help flushing, but
that afterwards she was just as direct and as much at her
ease as with any chance acquaintance, Levin was quite
happy again and said he was glad of it, and would not now
behave as stupidly as he had done at the election, but
would try the first time he met Vronsky to be as friendly
as possible.
‘It’s so wretched to feel that there’s a man almost an
enemy whom it’s painful to meet,’ said Levin. ‘I’m very,
very glad.’
Anna Karenina
1452 of 1759
Chapter 2
‘Go, please, go then and call on the Bols,’ Kitty said to
her husband, when he came in to see her at eleven o’clock
before going out. ‘I know you are dining at the club; papa
put down your name. But what are you going to do in the
morning?’
‘I am only going to Katavasov,’ answered Levin.
‘Why so early?’
‘He promised to introduce me to Metrov. I wanted to
talk to him about my work. He’s a distinguished scientific
man from Petersburg,’ said Levin.
‘Yes; wasn’t it his article you were praising so? Well,
and after that?’ said Kitty.
‘I shall go to the court, perhaps, about my sister’s
business.’
‘And the concert?’ she queried.
‘I shan’t go there all alone.’
‘No? do go; there are going to be some new things....
That interested you so. I should certainly go.’
‘Well, anyway, I shall come home before dinner,’ he
said, looking at his watch.
Anna Karenina
1453 of 1759
‘Put on your frock coat, so that you can go straight to
call on Countess Bola.’
‘But is it absolutely necessary?’
‘Oh, absolutely! He has been to see us. Come, what is
it? You go in, sit down, talk for five minutes of the
weather, get up and go away.’
‘Oh, you wouldn’t believe it! I’ve got so out of the
way of all this that it makes me feel positively ashamed. It’s
such a horrible thing to do! A complete outsider walks in,
sits down, stays on with nothing to do, wastes their time
and worries himself, and walks away!’
Kitty laughed.
‘Why, I suppose you used to pay calls before you were
married, didn’t you?’
‘Yes, I did, but I always felt ashamed, and now I’m so
out of the way of it that, by Jove! I’d sooner go two days
running without my dinner than pay this call! One’s so
ashamed! I feel all the while that they’re annoyed, that
they’re saying, ‘What has he come for?’ ‘
‘No, they won’t. I’ll answer for that,’ said Kitty,
looking into his face with a laugh. She took his hand.
‘Well, good-bye.... Do go, please.’
He was just going out after kissing his wife’s hand,
when she stopped him.
Anna Karenina
1454 of 1759
‘Kostya, do you know I’ve only fifty roubles left?’
‘Oh, all right, I’ll go to the bank and get some. How
much?’ he said, with the expression of dissatisfaction she
knew so well.
‘No, wait a minute.’ She held his hand. ‘Let’s talk
about it, it worries me. I seem to spend nothing
unnecessary, but money seems to fly away simply. We
don’t manage well, somehow.’
‘Oh, it’s all right,’ he said with a little cough, looking at
her from under his brows.
That cough she knew well. It was a sign of intense
dissatisfaction, not with her, but with himself. He certainly
was displeased not at so much money being spent, but at
being reminded of what he, knowing something was
unsatisfactory, wanted to forget.
‘I have told Sokolov to sell the wheat, and to borrow
an advance on the mill. We shall have money enough in
any case.’
‘Yes, but I’m afraid that altogether..’
‘Oh, it’s all right, all right,’ he repeated. ‘Well, goodbye, darling.’
‘No, I’m really sorry sometimes that I listened to
mamma. How nice it would have been in the country! As
it is, I’m worrying you all, and we’re wasting our money.’
Anna Karenina
1455 of 1759
‘Not at all, not at all. Not once since I’ve been married
have I said that things could have been better than they
are...’
‘Truly?’ she said, looking into his eyes.
He had said it without thinking, simply to console her.
But when he glanced at her and saw those sweet truthful
eyes fastened questioningly on him, he repeated it with his
whole heart. ‘I was positively forgetting her,’ he thought.
And he remembered what was before them, so soon to
come.
‘Will it be soon? How do you feel?’ he whispered,
taking her two hands.
‘I have so often thought so, that now I don’t think
about it or know anything about it.’
‘And you’re not frightened?’
She smiled contemptuously.
‘Not the least little bit,’ she said.
‘Well, if anything happens, I shall be at Katavasov’s.’
‘No, nothing will happen, and don’t think about it. I’m
going for a walk on the boulevard with papa. We’re going
to see Dolly. I shall expect you before dinner. Oh, yes! Do
you know that Dolly’s position is becoming utterly
impossible? She’s in debt all round; she hasn’t a penny. We
were talking yesterday with mamma and Arseny’ (this was
Anna Karenina
1456 of 1759
her sister’s husband Lvov), ‘and we determined to send
you with him to talk to Stiva. It’s really unbearable. One
can’t speak to papa about it.... But if you and he..’
‘Why, what can we do?’ said Levin.
‘You’ll be at Arseny’s, anyway; talk to him, he will tell
what we decided.’
‘Oh, I agree to everything Arseny thinks beforehand.
I’ll go and see him. By the way, if I do go to the concert,
I’ll go with Natalia. Well, good- bye.’
On the steps Levin was stopped by his old servant
Kouzma, who had been with him before his marriage, and
now looked after their household in town.
‘Beauty’ (that was the left shaft-horse brought up from
the country) ‘has been badly shod and is quite lame,’ he
said. ‘What does your honor wish to be done?’
During the first part of their stay in Moscow, Levin had
used his own horses brought up from the country. He had
tried to arrange this part of their expenses in the best and
cheapest way possible; but it appeared that their own
horses came dearer than hired horses, and they still hired
too.
‘Send for the veterinary, there may be a bruise.’
‘And for Katerina Alexandrovna?’ asked Konzma.
Anna Karenina
1457 of 1759
Levin was not by now struck as he had been at first by
the fact that to get from one end of Moscow to the other
he had to have two powerful horses put into a heavy
carriage, to take the carriage three miles through the
snowy slush and to keep it standing there four hours,
paying five roubles every time.
Now it seemed quite natural.
‘Hire a pair for our carriage from the jobmaster,’ said
he.
‘Yes, sir.’
And so, simply and easily, thanks to the facilities of
town life, Levin settled a question which, in the country,
would have called for so much personal trouble and
exertion, and going out onto the steps, he called a sledge,
sat down, and drove to Nikitsky. On the way he thought
no more of money, but mused on the introduction that
awaited him to the Petersburg savant, a writer on
sociology, and what he would say to him about his book.
Only during the first days of his stay in Moscow Levin
had been struck by the expenditure, strange to one living
in the country, unproductive but inevitable, that was
expected of him on every side. But by now he had grown
used to it. That had happened to him in this matter which
is said to happen to drunkards—the first glass sticks in the
Anna Karenina
1458 of 1759
throat, the second flies down like a hawk, but after the
third they’re like tiny little birds. When Levin had
changed his first hundred-rouble note to pay for liveries
for his footmen and hall-porter he could not help
reflecting that these liveries were of no use to anyone—
but they were indubitably necessary, to judge by the
amazement of the princess and Kitty when he suggested
that they might do without liveries,—that these liveries
would cost the wages of two laborers for the summer, that
is, would pay for about three hundred working days from
Easter to Ash Wednesday, and each a day of hard work
from early morning to late evening—and that hundredrouble note did stick in his throat. But the next note,
changed to pay for providing a dinner for their relations,
that cost twenty-eight roubles, though it did excite in
Levin the reflection that twenty-eight roubles meant nine
measures of oats, which men would with groans and sweat
have reaped and bound and thrashed and winnowed and
sifted and sown,—this next one he parted with more
easily. And now the notes he changed no longer aroused
such reflections, and they flew off like little birds. Whether
the labor devoted to obtaining the money corresponded to
the pleasure given by what was bought with it, was a
consideration he had long ago dismissed. His business
Anna Karenina
1459 of 1759
calculation that there divas a certain price below which he
could not sell certain grain was forgotten too. The rye, for
the price of which he had so long held out, had been sold
for fifty kopecks a measure cheaper than it had been
fetching a month ago. Even the consideration that with
such an expenditure he could not go on living for a year
without debt, that even had no force. Only one thing was
essential: to have money in the bank, without inquiring
where it came from, so as to know that one had the
wherewithal to buy meat for tomorrow. And this
condition had hitherto been fulfilled; he had always had
the money in the bank. But now the money in the bank
had gone, and he could not quite tell where to get the
next installment. And this it was which, at the moment
when Kitty had mentioned money, had disturbed him; but
he had no time to think about it. He drove off, thinking
of Katavasov and the meeting with Metrov that was before
him.
Anna Karenina
1460 of 1759
Chapter 3
Levin had on this visit to town seen a great deal of his
old friend at the university, Professor Katavasov, whom he
had not seen since his marriage. He liked in Katavasov the
clearness and simplicity of his conception of life. Levin
thought that the clearness of Katavasov’s conception of life
was due to the poverty of his nature; Katavasov thought
that the disconnectedness of Levin’s ideas was due to his
lack of intellectual discipline; but Levin enjoyed
Katavasov’s clearness, and Katavasov enjoyed the
abundance of Levin’s untrained ideas, and they liked to
meet and to discuss.
Levin had read Katavasov some parts of his book, and
he had liked them. On the previous day Katavasov had
met Levin at a public lecture and told him that the
celebrated Metrov, whose article Levin had so much liked,
was in Moscow, that he had been much interested by
what Katavasov had told him about Levin’s work, and that
he was coming to see him tomorrow at eleven, and would
be very glad to make Levin’s acquaintance.
‘You’re positively a reformed character, I’m glad to
see,’ said Katavasov, meeting Levin in the little drawing
Anna Karenina
1461 of 1759
room. ‘I heard the bell and thought: Impossible that it can
be he at the exact time!... Well, what do you say to the
Montenegrins now? They’re a race of warriors.’
‘Why, what’s happened?’ asked Levin.
Katavasov in a few words told him the last piece of
news from the war, and going into his study, introduced
Levin to a short, thick-set man of pleasant appearance.
This was Metrov. The conversation touched for a brief
space on politics and on how recent events were looked at
in the higher spheres in Petersburg. Metrov repeated a
saying that had reached him through a most trustworthy
source, reported as having been uttered on this subject by
the Tsar and one of the ministers. Katavasov had heard
also on excellent authority that the Tsar had said
something quite different. Levin tried to imagine
circumstances in which both sayings might have been
uttered, and the conversation on that topic dropped.
‘Yes, here he’s written almost a book on the natural
conditions of the laborer in relation to the land,’ said
Katavasov; ‘I’m not a specialist, but I, as a natural science
man, was pleased at his not taking mankind as something
outside biological laws; but, on the contrary, seeing his
dependence on his surroundings, and in that dependence
seeking the laws of his development.’
Anna Karenina
1462 of 1759
‘That’s very interesting,’ said Metrov.
‘What I began precisely was to write a book on
agriculture; but studying the chief instrument of
agriculture, the laborer,’ said Levin, reddening, ‘I could
not help coming to quite unexpected results.’
And Levin began carefully, as it were, feeling his
ground, to expound his views. He knew Metrov had
written an article against the generally accepted theory of
political economy, but to what extent he could reckon on
his sympathy with his own new views he did not know
and could not guess from the clever and serene face of the
learned man.
‘But in what do you see the special characteristics of the
Russian laborer?’ said Metrov; ‘in his biological
characteristics, so to speak, or in the condition in which he
is placed?’
Levin saw that there was an idea underlying this
question with which he did not agree. But he went on
explaining his own idea that the Russian laborer has a
quite special view of the land, different from that of other
people; and to support this proposition he made haste to
add that in his opinion this attitude of the Russian peasant
was due to the consciousness of his vocation to people vast
unoccupied expanses in the East.
Anna Karenina
1463 of 1759
‘One may easily be led into error in basing any
conclusion on the general vocation of a people,’ said
Metrov, interrupting Levin. ‘The condition of the laborer
will always depend on his relation to the land and to
capital.’
And without letting Levin finish explaining his idea,
Metrov began expounding to him the special point of his
own theory.
In what the point of his theory lay, Levin did not
understand, because he did not take the trouble to
understand. He saw that Metrov, like other people, in
spite of his own article, in which he had attacked the
current theory of political economy, looked at the position
of the Russian peasant simply from the point of view of
capital, wages, and rent. He would indeed have been
obliged to admit that in the eastern—much the larger—
part of Russia rent was as yet nil, that for nine-tenths of
the eighty millions of the Russian peasants wages took the
form simply of food provided for themselves, and that
capital does not so far exist except in the form of the most
primitive tools. Yet it was only from that point of view
that he considered every laborer, though in many points
he differed from the economists and had his own theory of
the wage-fund, which he expounded to Levin.
Anna Karenina
1464 of 1759
Levin listened reluctantly, and at first made objections.
He would have liked to interrupt Metrov, to explain his
own thought, which in his opinion would have rendered
further exposition of Metrov’s theories superfluous. But
later on, feeling convinced that they looked at the matter
so differently, that they could never understand one
another, he did not even oppose his statements, but simply
listened. Although what Metrov was saying was by now
utterly devoid of interest for him, he yet experienced a
certain satisfaction in listening to him. It flattered his
vanity that such a learned man should explain his ideas to
him so eagerly, with such intensity and confidence in
Levin’s understanding of the subject, sometimes with a
mere hint referring him to a whole aspect of the subject.
He put this down to his own credit, unaware that Metrov,
who had already discussed his theory over and over again
with all his intimate friends, talked of it with special
eagerness to every new person, and in general was eager to
talk to anyone of any subject that interested him, even if
still obscure to himself.
‘We are late though,’ said Katavasov, looking at his
watch directly Metrov had finished his discourse.
‘Yes, there’s a meeting of the Society of Amateurs
today in commemoration of the jubilee of Svintitch,’ said
Anna Karenina
1465 of 1759
Katavasov in answer to Levin’s inquiry. ‘Pyotr Ivanovitch
and I were going. I’ve promised to deliver an address on
his labors in zoology. Come along with us, it’s very
interesting.’
‘Yes, and indeed it’s time to start,’ said Metrov. ‘Come
with us, and from there, if you care to, come to my place.
I should very much like to hear your work.’
‘Oh, no! It’s no good yet, it’s unfinished. But I shall be
very glad to go to the meeting.’
‘I say, friends, have you heard? He has handed in the
separate report,’ Katavasov called from the other room,
where he was putting on his frock coat.
And a conversation sprang up upon the university
question, which was a very important event that winter in
Moscow. Three old professors in the council had not
accepted the opinion of the younger professors. The
young ones had registered a separate resolution. This, in
the judgment of some people, was monstrous, in the
judgment of others it was the simplest and most just thing
to do, and the professors were split up into two parties.
One party, to which Katavasov belonged, saw in the
opposite party a scoundrelly betrayal and treachery, while
the opposite party saw in them childishness and lack of
respect for the authorities. Levin, though he did not
Anna Karenina
1466 of 1759
belong to the university, had several times already during
his stay in Moscow heard and talked about this matter, and
had his own opinion on the subject. He took part in the
conversation that was continued in the street, as they all
three walked to the buildings of the old university.
The meeting had already begun. Round the clothcovered table, at which Katavasov and Metrov seated
themselves, there were some half-dozen persons, and one
of these was bending close over a manuscript, reading
something aloud. Levin sat down in one of the empty
chairs that were standing round the table, and in a whisper
asked a student sitting near what was being read. The
student, eyeing Levin with displeasure, said:
‘Biography.’
Though Levin was not interested in the biography, he
could not help listening, and learned some new and
interesting facts about the life of the distinguished man of
science.
When the reader had finished, the chairman thanked
him and read some verses of the poet Ment sent him on
the jubilee, and said a few words by way of thanks to the
poet. Then Katavasov in his loud, ringing voice read his
address on the scientific labors of the man whose jubilee
was being kept.
Anna Karenina
1467 of 1759
When Katavasov had finished, Levin looked at his
watch, saw it was past one, and thought that there would
not be time before the concert to read Metrov his book,
and indeed, he did not now care to do so. During the
reading he had thought over their conversation. He saw
distinctly now that though Metrov’s ideas might perhaps
have value, his own ideas had a value too, and their ideas
could only be made clear and lead to something if each
worked separately in his chosen path, and that nothing
would be gained by putting their ideas together. And
having made up his mind to refuse Metrov’s invitation,
Levin went up to him at the end of the meeting. Metrov
introduced Levin to the chairman, with whom he was
talking of the political news. Metrov told the chairman
what he had already told Levin, and Levin made the same
remarks on his news that he had already made that
morning, but for the sake of variety he expressed also a
new opinion which had only just struck him. After that
the conversation turned again on the university question.
As Levin had already heard it all, he made haste to tell
Metrov that he was sorry he could not take advantage of
his invitation, took leave, and drove to Lvov’s.
Anna Karenina
1468 of 1759
Chapter 4
Lvov, the husband of Natalia, Kitty’s sister, had spent
all his life in foreign capitals, where he had been educated,
and had been in the diplomatic service.
During the previous year he had left the diplomatic
service, not owing to any ‘unpleasantness’ (he never had
any ‘unpleasantness’ with anyone), and was transferred to
the department of the court of the palace in Moscow, in
order to give his two boys the best education possible.
In spite of the striking contrast in their habits and views
and the fact that Lvov was older than Levin, they had seen
a great deal of one another that winter, and had taken a
great liking to each other.
Lvov was at home, and Levin went in to him
unannounced.
Lvov, in a house coat with a belt and in chamois
leather shoes, was sitting in an armchair, and with a pincenez with blue glasses he was reading a book that stood on
a reading desk, while in his beautiful hand he held a halfburned cigarette daintily away from him.
Anna Karenina
1469 of 1759
His handsome, delicate, and still youthful-looking face,
to which his curly, glistening silvery hair gave a still more
aristocratic air, lighted up with a smile when he saw Levin.
‘Capital! I was meaning to send to you. How’s Kitty?
Sit here, it’s more comfortable.’ He got up and pushed up
a rocking chair. ‘Have you read the last circular in the
Journal de St. Petersbourg? I think it’s excellent,’ he said
with a slight French accent.
Levin told him what he had heard from Katavasov was
being said in Petersburg, and after talking a little about
politics, he told him of his interview with Metrov, and the
learned society’s meeting. To Lvov it was very interesting.
‘That’s what I envy you, that you are able to mix in
these interesting scientific circles,’ he said. And as he
talked, he passed as usual into French, which was easier to
him. ‘It’s true I haven’t the time for it. My official work
and the children leave me no time; and then I’m not
ashamed to own that my education has been too
defective.’
‘That I don’t believe,’ said Levin with a smile, feeling,
as he always did, touched at Lvov’s low opinion of
himself, which was not in the least put on from a desire to
seem or to be modest, but was absolutely sincere.
Anna Karenina
1470 of 1759
‘Oh, yes, indeed! I feel now how badly educated I am.
To educate my children I positively have to look up a
great deal, and in fact simply to study myself. For it’s not
enough to have teachers, there must be someone to look
after them, just as on your land you want laborers and an
overseer. See what I’m reading’—he pointed to Buslaev’s
Grammar on the desk—‘it’s expected of Misha, and it’s so
difficult.... Come, explain to me.... Here he says..’
Levin tried to explain to him that it couldn’t be
understood, but that it had to be taught; but Lvov would
not agree with him.
‘Oh, you’re laughing at it!’
‘On the contrary, you can’t imagine how, when I look
at you, I’m always learning the task that lies before me,
that is the education of one’s children.’
‘Well, there’s nothing for you to learn,’ said Lvov.
‘All I know,’ said Levin, ‘is that I have never seen
better brought-up children than yours, and I wouldn’t
wish for children better than yours.’
Lvov visibly tried to restrain the expression of his
delight, but he was positively radiant with smiles.
‘If only they’re better than I! That’s all I desire. You
don’t know yet all the work,’ he said, ‘with boys who’ve
been left like mine to run wild abroad.’
Anna Karenina
1471 of 1759
‘You’ll catch all that up. They’re such clever children.
The great thing is the education of character. That’s what
I learn when I look at your children.’
‘You talk of the education of character. You can’t
imagine how difficult that is! You have hardly succeeded
in combating one tendency when others crop up, and the
struggle begins again. If one had not a support in
religion—you remember we talked about that—no father
could bring children up relying on his own strength alone
without that help.’
This subject, which always interested Levin, was cut
short by the entrance of the beauty Natalia Alexandrovna,
dressed to go out.
‘I didn’t know you were here,’ she said, unmistakably
feeling no regret, but a positive pleasure, in interrupting
this conversation on a topic she had heard so much of that
she was by now weary of it. ‘Well, how is Kitty? I am
dining with you today. I tell you what, Arseny,’ she
turned to her husband, ‘you take the carriage.’
And the husband and wife began to discuss their
arrangements for the day. As the husband had to drive to
meet someone on official business, while the wife had to
go to the concert and some public meeting of a committee
on the Eastern Question, there was a great deal to consider
Anna Karenina
1472 of 1759
and settle. Levin had to take part in their plans as one of
themselves. It was settled that Levin should go with
Natalia to the concert and the meeting, and that from
there they should send the carriage to the office for
Arseny, and he should call for her and take her to Kitty’s;
or that, if he had not finished his work, he should send the
carriage back and Levin would go with her.
‘He’s spoiling me,’ Lvov said to his wife, ‘he assures me
that our children are splendid, when I know how much
that’s bad there is in them.’
‘Arseny goes to extremes, I always say,’ said his wife. ‘If
you look for perfection, you will never be satisfied. And
it’s true, as papa says,— that when we were brought up
there was one extreme—we were kept in the basement,
while our parents lived in the best rooms; now it’s just the
other way—the parents are in the wash house, while the
children are in the best rooms. Parents now are not
expected to live at all, but to exist altogether for their
children.’
‘Well, what if they like it better?’ Lvov said, with his
beautiful smile, touching her hand. ‘Anyone who didn’t
know you would think you were a stepmother, not a true
mother.’
Anna Karenina
1473 of 1759
‘No, extremes are not good in anything,’ Natalia said
serenely, putting his paper knife straight in its proper place
on the table.
‘Well, come here, you perfect children,’ Lvov said to
the two handsome boys who came in, and after bowing to
Levin, went up to their father, obviously wishing to ask
him about something.
Levin would have liked to talk to them, to hear what
they would say to their father, but Natalia began talking to
him, and then Lvov’s colleague in the service, Mahotin,
walked in, wearing his court uniform, to go with him to
meet someone, and a conversation was kept up without a
break upon Herzegovina, Princess Korzinskaya, the town
council, and the sudden death of Madame Apraksina.
Levin even forgot the commission intrusted to him. He
recollected it as he was going into the hall.
‘Oh, Kitty told me to talk to you about Oblonsky,’ he
said, as Lvov was standing on the stairs, seeing his wife and
Levin off.
‘Yes, yes, maman wants us, les beaux-freres, to attack
him,’ he said, blushing. ‘But why should I?’
‘Well, then, I will attack him,’ said Madame Lvova,
with a smile, standing in her white sheepskin cape, waiting
till they had finished speaking. ‘Come, let us go.’
Anna Karenina
1474 of 1759
Chapter 5
At the concert in the afternoon two very interesting
things were performed. One was a fantasia, King Lear; the
other was a quartette dedicated to the memory of Bach.
Both were new and in the new style, and Levin was eager
to form an opinion of them. After escorting his sister-inlaw to her stall, he stood against a column and tried to
listen as attentively and conscientiously as possible. He
tried not to let his attention be distracted, and not to spoil
his impression by looking at the conductor in a white tie,
waving his arms, which always disturbed his enjoyment of
music so much, or the ladies in bonnets, with strings
carefully tied over their ears, and all these people either
thinking of nothing at all or thinking of all sorts of things
except the music. He tried to avoid meeting musical
connoisseurs or talkative acquaintances, and stood looking
at the floor straight before him, listening.
But the more he listened to the fantasia of Ring Lear
the further he felt from forming any definite opinion of it.
There was, as it were, a continual beginning, a preparation
of the musical expression of some feeling, but it fell to
pieces again directly, breaking into new musical motives,
Anna Karenina
1475 of 1759
or simply nothing but the whims of the composer,
exceedingly complex but disconnected sounds. And these
fragmentary musical expressions, though sometimes
beautiful, were disagreeable, because they were utterly
unexpected and not led up to by anything. Gaiety and
grief and despair and tenderness and triumph followed one
another without any connection, like the emotions of a
madman. And those emotions, like a madman’s, sprang up
quite unexpectedly.
During the whole of the performance Levin felt like a
deaf man watching people dancing, and was in a state of
complete bewilderment when the fantasia was over, and
felt a great weariness from the fruitless strain on his
attention. Loud applause resounded on all sides. Everyone
got up, moved about, and began talking. Anxious to
throw some light on his own perplexity from the
impressions of others, Levin began to walk about, looking
for connoisseurs, and was glad to see a well-known
musical amateur in conversation with Pestsov, whom he
knew.
‘Marvelous!’ Pestsov was saying in his mellow bass.
‘How are you, Konstantin Dmitrievitch? Particularly
sculpturesque and plastic, so to say, and richly colored is
that passage where you feel Cordelia’s approach, where
Anna Karenina
1476 of 1759
woman, das ewig Weibliche, enters into conflict with fate.
Isn’t it?’
‘You mean...what has Cordelia to do with it?’ Levin
asked timidly, forgetting that the fantasia was supposed to
represent King Lear.
‘Cordelia comes in...see here!’ said Pestsov, tapping his
finger on the satiny surface of the program he held in his
hand and passing it to Levin.
Only then Levin recollected the title of the fantasia, and
made haste to read in the Russian translation the lines
from Shakespeare that were printed on the back of the
program.
‘You can’t follow it without that,’ said Pestsov,
addressing Levin, as the person he had been speaking to
had gone away, and he had no one to talk to.
In the entr’acte Levin and Pestsov fell into an argument
upon the merits and defects of music of the Wagner
school. Levin maintained that the mistake of Wagner and
all his followers lay in their trying to take music into the
sphere of another art, just as poetry goes wrong when it
tries to paint a face as the art of painting ought to do, and
as an instance of this mistake he cited the sculptor who
carved in marble certain poetic phantasms flitting round
the figure of the poet on the pedestal. ‘These phantoms
Anna Karenina
1477 of 1759
were so far from being phantoms that they were positively
clinging on the ladder,’ said Levin. The comparison
pleased him, but he could not remember whether he had
not used the same phrase before, and to Pestsov, too, and
as he said it he felt confused.
Pestsov maintained that art is one, and that it can attain
its highest manifestations only by conjunction with all
kinds of art.
The second piece that was performed Levin could not
hear. Pestsov, who was standing beside him, was talking to
him almost all the time, condemning the music for its
excessive affected assumption of simplicity, and comparing
it with the simplicity of the Pre-Raphaelites in painting.
As he went out Levin met many more acquaintances, with
whom he talked of politics, of music, and of common
acquaintances. Among others he met Count Bol, whom
he had utterly forgotten to call upon.
‘Well, go at once then,’ Madame Lvova said, when he
told her; ‘perhaps they’ll not be at home, and then you
can come to the meeting to fetch me. You’ll find me still
there.’
Anna Karenina
1478 of 1759
Chapter 6
‘Perhaps they’re not at home?’ said Levin, as he went
into the hall of Countess Bola’s house.
‘At home; please walk in,’ said the porter, resolutely
removing his overcoat.
‘How annoying!’ thought Levin with a sigh, taking off
one glove and stroking his hat. ‘What did I come for?
What have I to say to them?’
As he passed through the first drawing room Levin met
in the doorway Countess Bola, giving some order to a
servant with a care-worn and severe face. On seeing Levin
she smiled, and asked him to come into the little drawing
room, where he heard voices. In this room there were
sitting in armchairs the two daughters of the countess, and
a Moscow colonel, whom Levin knew. Levin went up,
greeted them, and sat down beside the sofa with his hat on
his knees.
‘How is your wife? Have you been at the concert? We
couldn’t go. Mamma had to be at the funeral service.’
‘Yes, I heard.... What a sudden death!’ said Levin.
The countess came in, sat down on the sofa, and she
too asked after his wife and inquired about the concert.
Anna Karenina
1479 of 1759
Levin answered, and repeated an inquiry about
Madame Apraksina’s sudden death.
‘But she was always in weak health.’
‘Were you at the opera yesterday?’
‘Yes, I was.’
‘Lucca was very good.’
‘Yes, very good,’ he said, and as it was utterly of no
consequence to him what they thought of him, he began
repeating what they had heard a hundred times about the
characteristics of the singer’s talent. Countess Bola
pretended to be listening. Then, when he had said enough
and paused, the colonel, who had been silent till then,
began to talk. The colonel too talked of the opera, and
about culture. At last, after speaking of the proposed folle
journee at Turin’s, the colonel laughed, got up noisily,
and went away. Levin too rose, but he saw by the face of
the countess that it was not yet time for him to go. He
must stay two minutes longer. He sat down.
But as he was thinking all the while how stupid it was,
he could not find a subject for conversation, and sat silent.
‘You are not going to the public meeting? They say it
will be very interesting,’ began the countess.
‘No, I promised my belle-soeur to fetch her from it,’
said Levin.
Anna Karenina
1480 of 1759
A silence followed. The mother once more exchanged
glances with a daughter.
‘Well, now I think the time has come,’ thought Levin,
and he got up. The ladies shook hands with him, and
begged him to say mille choses to his wife for them.
The porter asked him, as he gave him his coat, ‘Where
is your honor staying?’ and immediately wrote down his
address in a big handsomely bound book.
‘Of course I don’t care, but still I feel ashamed and
awfully stupid,’ thought Levin, consoling himself with the
reflection that everyone does it. He drove to the public
meeting, where he was to find his sister-in-law, so as to
drive home with her.
At the public meeting of the committee there were a
great many people, and almost all the highest society.
Levin was in time for the report which, as everyone said,
was very interesting. When the reading of the report was
over, people moved about, and Levin met Sviazhsky, who
invited him very pressingly to come that evening to a
meeting of the Society of Agriculture, where a celebrated
lecture was to be delivered, and Stepan Arkadyevitch, who
had only just come from the races, and many other
acquaintances; and Levin heard and uttered various
criticisms on the meeting, on the new fantasia, and on a
Anna Karenina
1481 of 1759
public trial. But, probably from the mental fatigue he was
beginning to feel, he made a blunder in speaking of the
trial, and this blunder he recalled several times with
vexation. Speaking of the sentence upon a foreigner who
had been condemned in Russia, and of how unfair it
would be to punish him by exile abroad, Levin repeated
what he had heard the day before in conversation from an
acquaintance.
‘I think sending him abroad is much the same as
punishing a carp by putting it into the water,’ said Levin.
Then he recollected that this idea, which he had heard
from an acquaintance and uttered as his own, came from a
fable of Krilov’s, and that the acquaintance had picked it
up from a newspaper article.
After driving home with his sister-in-law, and finding
Kitty in good spirits and quite well, Levin drove to the
club.
Anna Karenina
1482 of 1759
Chapter 7
Levin reached the club just at the right time. Members
and visitors were driving up as he arrived. Levin had not
been at the club for a very long while—not since he lived
in Moscow, when he was leaving the university and going
into society. He remembered the club, the external details
of its arrangement, but he had completely forgotten the
impression it had made on him in old days. But as soon as,
driving into the wide semicircular court and getting out of
the sledge, he mounted the steps, and the hall porter,
adorned with a crossway scarf, noiselessly opened the door
to him with a bow; as soon as he saw in the porter’s room
the cloaks and galoshes of members who thought it less
trouble to take them off downstairs; as soon as he heard
the mysterious ringing bell that preceded him as he
ascended the easy, carpeted staircase, and saw the statue on
the landing, and the third porter at the top doors, a
familiar figure grown older, in the club livery, opening the
door without haste or delay, and scanning the visitors as
they passed in—Levin felt the old impression of the club
come back in a rush, an impression of repose, comfort,
and propriety.
Anna Karenina
1483 of 1759
‘Your hat, please,’ the porter said to Levin, who forgot
the club rule to leave his hat in the porter’s room. ‘Long
time since you’ve been. The prince put your name down
yesterday. Prince Stepan Arkadyevitch is not here yet.’
The porter did not only know Levin, but also all his
ties and relationships, and so immediately mentioned his
intimate friends.
Passing through the outer hall, divided up by screens,
and the room partitioned on the right, where a man sits at
the fruit buffet, Levin overtook an old man walking slowly
in, and entered the dining room full of noise and people.
He walked along the tables, almost all full, and looked
at the visitors. He saw people of all sorts, old and young;
some he knew a little, some intimate friends. There was
not a single cross or worried-looking face. All seemed to
have left their cares and anxieties in the porter’s room with
their hats, and were all deliberately getting ready to enjoy
the material blessings of life. Sviazhsky was here and
Shtcherbatsky, Nevyedovsky and the old prince, and
Vronsky and Sergey Ivanovitch.
‘Ah! why are you late?’ the prince said smiling, and
giving him his hand over his own shoulder. ‘How’s Kitty?’
he added, smoothing out the napkin he had tucked in at
his waistcoat buttons.
Anna Karenina
1484 of 1759
‘All right; they are dining at home, all the three of
them.’
‘Ah, ‘Aline-Nadine,’ to be sure! There’s no room with
us. Go to that table, and make haste and take a seat,’ said
the prince, and turning away he carefully took a plate of
eel soup.
‘Levin, this way!’ a good-natured voice shouted a little
farther on. It was Turovtsin. He was sitting with a young
officer, and beside them were two chairs turned upside
down. Levin gladly went up to them. He had always liked
the good-hearted rake, Turovtsin—he was associated in
his mind with memories of his courtship—and at that
moment, after the strain of intellectual conversation, the
sight of Turovtsin’s good-natured face was particularly
welcome.
‘For you and Oblonsky. He’ll be here directly.’
The young man, holding himself very erect, with eyes
forever twinkling with enjoyment, was an officer from
Petersburg, Gagin. Turovtsin introduced them.
‘Oblonsky’s always late.’
‘Ah, here he is!’
‘Have you only just come?’ said Oblonsky, coming
quickly towards them. ‘Good day. Had some vodka? Well,
come along then.’
Anna Karenina
1485 of 1759
Levin got up and went with him to the big table spread
with spirits and appetizers of the most various kinds. One
would have thought that out of two dozen delicacies one
might find something to one’s taste, but Stepan
Arkadyevitch asked for something special, and one of the
liveried waiters standing by immediately brought what was
required. They drank a wine glassful and returned to their
table.
At once, while they were still at the soup, Gagin was
served with champagne, and told the waiter to fill four
glasses. Levin did not refuse the wine, and asked for a
second bottle. He was very hungry, and ate and drank
with great enjoyment, and with still greater enjoyment
took part in the lively and simple conversation of his
companions. Gagin, dropping his voice, told the last good
story from Petersburg, and the story, though improper and
stupid, was so ludicrous that Levin broke into roars of
laughter so loud that those near looked round.
‘That’s in the same style as, ‘that’s a thing I can’t
endure!’ You know the story?’ said Stepan Arkadyevitch.
‘Ah, that’s exquisite! Another bottle,’ he said to the waiter,
and he began to relate his good story.
‘Pyotr Illyitch Vinovsky invites you to drink with him,’
a little old waiter interrupted Stepan Arkadyevitch,
Anna Karenina
1486 of 1759
bringing two delicate glasses of sparkling champagne, and
addressing Stepan Arkadyevitch and Levin. Stepan
Arkadyevitch took the glass, and looking towards a bald
man with red mustaches at the other end of the table, he
nodded to him, smiling.
‘Who’s that?’ asked Levin.
‘You met him once at my place, don’t you remember?
A good-natured fellow.’
Levin did the same as Stepan Arkadyevitch and took
the glass.
Stepan Arkadyevitch’s anecdote too was very amusing.
Levin told his story, and that too was successful. Then
they talked of horses, of the races, of what they had been
doing that day, and of how smartly Vronsky’s Atlas had
won the first prize. Levin did not notice how the time
passed at dinner.
‘Ah! and here they are!’ Stepan Arkadyevitch said
towards the end of dinner, leaning over the back of his
chair and holding out his hand to Vronsky, who came up
with a tall officer of the Guards. Vronsky’s face too
beamed with the look of good-humored enjoyment that
was general in the club. He propped his elbow playfully
on Stepan Arkadyevitch’s shoulder, whispering something
Anna Karenina
1487 of 1759
to him, and he held out his hand to Levin with the same
good-humored smile.
‘Very glad to meet you,’ he said. ‘I looked out for you
at the election, but I was told you had gone away.’
‘Yes, I left the same day. We’ve just been talking of
your horse. I congratulate you,’ said Levin. ‘It was very
rapidly run.’
‘Yes; you’ve race horses too, haven’t you?’
‘No, my father had; but I remember and know
something about it.’
‘Where have you dined?’ asked Stepan Arkadyevitch.
‘We were at the second table, behind the columns.’
‘We’ve been celebrating his success,’ said the tall
colonel. ‘It’s his second Imperial prize. I wish I might have
the luck at cards he has with horses. Well, why waste the
precious time? I’m going to the ‘infernal regions,’’ added
the colonel, and he walked away.
‘That’s Yashvin,’ Vronsky said in answer to Turovtsin,
and he sat down in the vacated seat beside them. He drank
the glass offered him, and ordered a bottle of wine. Under
the influence of the club atmosphere or the wine he had
drunk, Levin chatted away to Vronsky of the best breeds
of cattle, and was very glad not to feel the slightest
hostility to this man. He even told him, among other
Anna Karenina
1488 of 1759
things, that he had heard from his wife that she had met
him at Princess Marya Borissovna’s.
‘Ah, Princess Marya Borissovna, she’s exquisite!’ said
Stepan Arkadyevitch, and he told an anecdote about her
which set them all laughing. Vronsky particularly laughed
with such simplehearted amusement that Levin felt quite
reconciled to him.
‘Well, have we finished?’ said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
getting up with a smile. ‘Let us go.’
Anna Karenina
1489 of 1759
Chapter 8
Getting up from the table, Levin walked with Gagin
through the lofty room to the billiard room, feeling his
arms swing as he walked with a peculiar lightness and ease.
As he crossed the big room, he came upon his father-inlaw.
‘Well, how do you like our Temple of Idolence?’ said
the prince, taking his arm. ‘Come along, come along!’
‘Yes, I wanted to walk about and look at everything.
It’s interesting.’
‘Yes, it’s interesting for you. But its interest for me is
quite different. You look at those little old men now,’ he
said, pointing to a club member with bent back and
projecting lip, shuffling towards them in his soft boots,
‘and imagine that they were shlupiks like that from their
birth up.’
‘How shlupiks?’
‘I see you don’t know that name. That’s our club
designation. You know the game of rolling eggs: when
one’s rolled a long while it becomes a shlupik. So it is
with us; one goes on coming and coming to the club, and
ends by becoming a shlupik. Ah, you laugh! but we look
Anna Karenina
1490 of 1759
out, for fear of dropping into it ourselves. You know
Prince Tchetchensky?’ inquired the prince; and Levin saw
by his face that he was just going to relate something
funny.
‘No, I don’t know him.’
‘You don’t say so! Well, Prince Tchetchensky is a wellknown figure. No matter, though. He’s always playing
billiards here. Only three years ago he was not a shlupik
and kept up his spirits and even used to call other people
shlupiks. But one day he turns up, and our porter...you
know Vassily? Why, that fat one; he’s famous for his bon
mots. And so Prince Tchetchensky asks him, ‘Come,
Vassily, who’s here? Any shlupiks here yet?’ And he says,
‘You’re the third.’ Yes, my dear boy, that he did!’
Talking and greeting the friends they met, Levin and
the prince walked through all the rooms: the great room
where tables had already been set, and the usual partners
were playing for small stakes; the divan room, where they
were playing chess, and Sergey Ivanovitch was sitting
talking to somebody; the billiard room, where, about a
sofa in a recess, there was a lively party drinking
champagne—Gagin was one of them. They peeped into
the ‘infernal regions,’ where a good many men were
crowding round one table, at which Yashvin was sitting.
Anna Karenina
1491 of 1759
Trying not to make a noise, they walked into the dark
reading room, where under the shaded lamps there sat a
young man with a wrathful countenance, turning over
one journal after another, and a bald general buried in a
book. They went, too, into what the prince called the
intellectual room, where three gentlemen were engaged in
a heated discussion of the latest political news.
‘Prince, please come, we’re ready,’ said one of his card
party, who had come to look for him, and the prince went
off. Levin sat down and listened, but recalling all the
conversation of the morning he felt all of a sudden
fearfully bored. He got up hurriedly, and went to look for
Oblonsky and Turovtsin, with whom it had been so
pleasant.
Turovtsin was one of the circle drinking in the billiard
room, and Stepan Arkadyevitch was talking with Vronsky
near the door at the farther corner of the room.
‘It’s not that she’s dull; but this undefined, this
unsettled position,’ Levin caught, and he was hurrying
away, but Stepan Arkadyevitch called to him.
‘Levied’ said Stepan Arkadyevitch, and Levin noticed
that his eyes were not full of tears exactly, but moist,
which always happened when he had been drinking, or
when he was touched. Just now it was due to both causes.
Anna Karenina
1492 of 1759
‘Levin, don’t go,’ he said, and he warmly squeezed his arm
above the elbow, obviously not at all wishing to let him
go.
‘This is a true friend of mine—almost my greatest
friend,’ he said to Vronsky. ‘You have become even closer
and dearer to me. And I want you, and I know you ought,
to be friends, and great friends, because you’re both
splendid fellows.’
‘Well, there’s nothing for us now but to kiss and be
friends,’ Vronsky said, with good-natured playfulness,
holding out his hand.
Levin quickly took the offered hand, and pressed it
warmly.
‘I’m very, very glad,’ said Levin.
‘Waiter, a bottle of champagne,’ said Stepan
Arkadyevitch.
‘And I’m very glad,’ said Vronsky.
But in spite of Stepan Arkadyevitch’s desire, and their
own desire, they had nothing to talk about, and both felt
it.
‘Do you know, he has never met Anna?’ Stepan
Arkadyevitch said to Vronsky. ‘And I want above
everything to take him to see her. Let us go, Levin!’
Anna Karenina
1493 of 1759
‘Really?’ said Vronsky. ‘She will be very glad to see
you. I should be going home at once,’ he added, ‘but I’m
worried about Yashvin, and I want to stay on till he
finishes.’
‘Why, is he losing?’
‘He keeps losing, and I’m the only friend that can
restrain him.’
‘Well, what do you say to pyramids? Levin, will you
play? Capital!’ said Stepan Arkadyevitch. ‘Get the table
ready,’ he said to the marker.
‘It has been ready a long while,’ answered the marker,
who had already set the balls in a triangle, and was
knocking the red one about for his own diversion.
‘Well, let us begin.’
After the game Vronsky and Levin sat down at Gagin’s
table, and at Stepan Arkadyevitch’s suggestion Levin took
a hand in the game.
Vronsky sat down at the table, surrounded by friends,
who were incessantly coming up to him. Every now and
then he went to the ‘infernal’ to keep an eye on Yashvin.
Levin was enjoying a delightful sense of repose after the
mental fatigue of the morning. He was glad that all
hostility was at an end with Vronsky, and the sense of
peace, decorum, and comfort never left him.
Anna Karenina
1494 of 1759
When the game was over, Stepan Arkadyevitch took
Levin’s arm.
‘Well, let us go to Anna’s, then. At once? Eh? She is at
home. I promised her long ago to bring you. Where were
you meaning to spend the evening?’
‘Oh, nowhere specially. I promised Sviazhsky to go to
the Society of Agriculture. By all means, let us go,’ said
Levin.
‘Very good; come along. Find out if my carriage is
here,’ Stepan Arkadyevitch said to the waiter.
Levin went up to the table, paid the forty roubles he
had lost; paid his bill, the amount of which was in some
mysterious way ascertained by the little old waiter who
stood at the counter, and swinging his arms he walked
through all the rooms to the way out.
Anna Karenina
1495 of 1759
Chapter 9
‘Oblonsky’s carriage!’ the porter shouted in an angry
bass. The carriage drove up and both got in. It was only
for the first few moments, while the carriage was driving
out of the clubhouse gates, that Levin was still under the
influence of the club atmosphere of repose, comfort, and
unimpeachable good form. But as soon as the carriage
drove out into the street, and he felt it jolting over the
uneven road, heard the angry shout of a sledge driver
coming towards them, saw in the uncertain light the red
blind of a tavern and the shops, this impression was
dissipated, and he began to think over his actions, and to
wonder whether he was doing right in going to see Anna.
What would Kitty say? But Stepan Arkadyevitch gave him
no time for reflection, and, as though divining his doubts,
he scattered them.
‘How glad I am,’ he said, ‘that you should know her!
You know Dolly has long wished for it. And Lvov’s been
to see her, and often goes. Though she is my sister,’
Stepan Arkadyevitch pursued, ‘I don’t hesitate to say that
she’s a remarkable woman. But you will see. Her position
is very painful, especially now.’
Anna Karenina
1496 of 1759
‘Why especially now?’
‘We are carrying on negotiations with her husband
about a divorce. And he’s agreed; but there are difficulties
in regard to the son, and the business, which ought to
have been arranged long ago, has been dragging on for
three months past. As soon as the divorce is over, she will
marry Vronsky. How stupid these old ceremonies are, that
no one believes in, and which only prevent people being
comfortable!’ Stepan Arkadyevitch put in. ‘Well, then
their position will be as regular as mine, as yours.’
‘What is the difficulty?’ said Levin.
‘Oh, it’s a long and tedious story! The whole business is
in such an anomalous position with us. But the point is
she has been for three months in Moscow, where
everyone knows her, waiting for the divorce; she goes out
nowhere, sees no woman except Dolly, because, do you
understand, she doesn’t care to have people come as a
favor. That fool Princess Varvara, even she has left her,
considering this a breach of propriety. Well, you see, in
such a position any other woman would not have found
resources in herself. But you’ll see how she has arranged
her life—how calm, how dignified she is. To the left, in
the crescent opposite the church!’ shouted Stepan
Arkadyevitch, leaning out of the window. ‘Phew! how
Anna Karenina
1497 of 1759
hot it is!’ he said, in spite of twelve degrees of frost,
flinging his open overcoat still wider open.
‘But she has a daughter: no doubt she’s busy looking
after her?’ said Levin.
‘I believe you picture every woman simply as a female,
une couveuse,’ said Stepan Arkadyevitch. ‘If she’s
occupied, it must be with her children. No, she brings her
up capitally, I believe, but one doesn’t hear about her.
She’s busy, in the first place, with what she writes. I see
you’re smiling ironically, but you’re wrong. She’s writing
a children’s book, and doesn’t talk about it to anyone, but
she read it to me and I gave the manuscript to
Vorkuev...you know the publisher...and he’s an author
himself too, I fancy. He understands those things, and he
says it’s a remarkable piece of work. But are you fancying
she’s an authoress?—not a bit of it. She’s a woman with a
heart, before everything, but you’ll see. Now she has a
little English girl with her, and a whole family she’s
looking after.’
‘Oh, something in a philanthropic way?’
‘Why, you will look at everything in the worst light.
It’s not from philanthropy, it’s from the heart. They—that
is, Vronsky— had a trainer, an Englishman, first-rate in his
own line, but a drunkard. He’s completely given up to
Anna Karenina
1498 of 1759
drink—delirium tremens— and the family were cast on
the world. She saw them, helped them, got more and
more interested in them, and now the whole family is on
her hands. But not by way of patronage, you know,
helping with money; she’s herself preparing the boys in
Russian for the high school, and she’s taken the little girl
to live with her. But you’ll see her for yourself.’
The carriage drove into the courtyard, and Stepan
Arkadyevitch rang loudly at the entrance where sledges
were standing.
And without asking the servant who opened the door
whether the lady were at home, Stepan Arkadyevitch
walked into the hall. Levin followed him, more and more
doubtful whether he was doing right or wrong.
Looking at himself in the glass, Levin noticed that he
was red in the face, but he felt certain he was not drunk,
and he followed Stepan Arkadyevitch up the carpeted
stairs. At the top Stepan Arkadyevitch inquired of the
footman, who bowed to him as to an intimate friend, who
was with Anna Arkadyevna, and received the answer that
it was M. Vorkuev.
‘Where are they?’
‘In the study.’
Anna Karenina
1499 of 1759
Passing through the dining room, a room not very
large, with dark, paneled walls, Stepan Arkadyevitch and
Levin walked over the soft carpet to the half-dark study,
lighted up by a single lamp with a big dark shade. Another
lamp with a reflector was hanging on the wall, lighting up
a big full-length portrait of a woman, which Levin could
not help looking at. It was the portrait of Anna, painted in
Italy by Mihailov. While Stepan Arkadyevitch went
behind the treillage, and the man’s voice which had been
speaking paused, Levin gazed at the portrait, which stood
out from the frame in the brilliant light thrown on it, and
he could not tear himself away from it. He positively
forgot where he was, and not even hearing what was said,
he could not take his eyes off the marvelous portrait. It
was not a picture, but a living, charming woman, with
black curling hair, with bare arms and shoulders, with a
pensive smile on the lips, covered with soft down;
triumphantly and softly she looked at him with eyes that
baffled him. She was not living only because she was more
beautiful than a living woman can be.
‘I am delighted!’ He heard suddenly near him a voice,
unmistakably addressing him, the voice of the very woman
he had been admiring in the portrait. Anna had come
from behind the treillage to meet him, and Levin saw in
Anna Karenina
1500 of 1759
the dim light of the study the very woman of the portrait,
in a dark blue shot gown, not in the same position nor
with the same expression, but with the same perfection of
beauty which the artist had caught in the portrait. She was
less dazzling in reality, but, on the other hand, there was
something fresh and seductive in the living woman which
was not in the portrait.
Anna Karenina
1501 of 1759
Chapter 10
She had risen to meet him, not concealing her pleasure
at seeing him; and in the quiet ease with which she held
out her little vigorous hand, introduced him to Vorkuev
and indicated a red-haired, pretty little girl who was sitting
at work, calling her her pupil, Levin recognized and liked
the manners of a woman of the great world, always selfpossessed and natural.
‘I am delighted, delighted,’ she repeated, and on her
lips these simple words took for Levin’s ears a special
significance. ‘I have known you and liked you for a long
while, both from your friendship with Stiva and for your
wife’s sake.... I knew her for a very short time, but she left
on me the impression of an exquisite flower, simply a
flower. And to think she will soon be a mother!’
She spoke easily and without haste, looking now and
then from Levin to her brother, and Levin felt that the
impression he was making was good, and he felt
immediately at home, simple and happy with her, as
though he had known her from childhood.
‘Ivan Petrovitch and I settled in Alexey’s study,’ she
said in answer to Stepan Arkadyevitch’s question whether
Anna Karenina
1502 of 1759
he might smoke, ‘just so as to be able to smoke’—and
glancing at Levin, instead of asking whether he would
smoke, she pulled closer a tortoise-shell cigar-case and
took a cigarette.
‘How are you feeling today?’ her brother asked her.
‘Oh, nothing. Nerves, as usual.’
‘Yes, isn’t it extraordinarily fine?’ said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, noticing that Levin was scrutinizing the
picture.
‘I have never seen a better portrait.’
‘And extraordinarily like, isn’t it?’ said Vorkuev.
Levin looked from the portrait to the original. A
peculiar brilliance lighted up Anna’s face when she felt his
eyes on her. Levin flushed, and to cover his confusion
would have asked whether she had seen Darya
Alexandrovna lately; but at that moment Anna spoke. ‘We
were just talking, Ivan Petrovitch and I, of Vashtchenkov’s
last pictures. Have you seen them?’
‘Yes, I have seen them,’ answered Levin.
‘But, I beg your pardon, I interrupted you...you were
saying?..’
Levin asked if she had seen Dolly lately.
Anna Karenina
1503 of 1759
‘She was here yesterday. She was very indignant with
the high school people on Grisha’s account. The Latin
teacher, it seems, had been unfair to him.’
‘Yes, I have seen his pictures. I didn’t care for them
very much,’ Levin went back to the subject she had
started.
Levin talked now not at all with that purely businesslike
attitude to the subject with which he had been talking all
the morning. Every word in his conversation with her had
a special significance. And talking to her was pleasant; still
pleasanter it was to listen to her.
Anna talked not merely naturally and cleverly, but
cleverly and carelessly, attaching no value to her own ideas
and giving great weight to the ideas of the person she was
talking to.
The conversation turned on the new movement in art,
on the new illustrations of the Bible by a French artist.
Vorkuev attacked the artist for a realism carried to the
point of coarseness.
Levin said that the French had carried conventionality
further than anyone, and that consequently they see a great
merit in the return to realism. In the fact of not lying they
see poetry.
Anna Karenina
1504 of 1759
Never had anything clever said by Levin given him so
much pleasure as this remark. Anna’s face lighted up at
once, as at once she appreciated the thought. She laughed.
‘I laugh,’ she said, ‘as one laughs when one sees a very
true portrait. What you said so perfectly hits off French art
now, painting and literature too, indeed—Zola, Daudet.
But perhaps it is always so, that men form their
conceptions from fictitious, conventional types, and
then—all the combinaisons made—they are tired of the
fictitious figures and begin to invent more natural, true
figures.’
‘That’s perfectly true,’ said Vorknev.
‘So you’ve been at the club?’ she said to her brother.
‘Yes, yes, this is a woman!’ Levin thought, forgetting
himself and staring persistently at her lovely, mobile face,
which at that moment was all at once completely
transformed. Levin did not hear what she was talking of as
she leaned over to her brother, but he was struck by the
change of her expression. Her face—so handsome a
moment before in its repose—suddenly wore a look of
strange curiosity, anger, and pride. But this lasted only an
instant. She dropped her eyelids, as though recollecting
something.
Anna Karenina
1505 of 1759
‘Oh, well, but that’s of no interest to anyone,’ she said,
and she turned to the English girl.
‘Please order the tea in the drawing room,’ she said in
English.
The girl got up and went out.
‘Well, how did she get through her examination?’
asked Stepan Arkadyevitch.
‘Splendidly! She’s a very gifted child and a sweet
character.’
‘It will end in your loving her more than your own.’
‘There a man speaks. In love there’s no more nor less. I
love my daughter with one love, and her with another.’
‘I was just telling Anna Arkadyevna,’ said Vorkuev,
‘that if she were to put a hundredth part of the energy she
devotes to this English girl to the public question of the
education of Russian children, she would be doing a great
and useful work.’
‘Yes, but I can’t help it; I couldn’t do it. Count Alexey
Kirillovitch urged me very much’ (as she uttered the
words Count Alexey Kirillovitch she glanced with
appealing timidity at Levin, and he unconsciously
responded with a respectful and reassuring look); ‘he urged
me to take up the school in the village. I visited it several
times. The children were very nice, but I could not feel
Anna Karenina
1506 of 1759
drawn to the work. You speak of energy. Energy rests
upon love; and come as it will, there’s no forcing it. I took
to this child—I could not myself say why.’
And she glanced again at Levin. And her smile and her
glance— all told him that it was to him only she was
addressing her words, valuing his good opinion, and at the
same time sure beforehand that they understood each
other.
‘I quite understand that,’ Levin answered. ‘It’s
impossible to give one’s heart to a school or such
institutions in general, and I believe that’s just why
philanthropic institutions always give such poor results.’
she was silent for a while, then she smiled.
‘Yes, yes,’ she agreed; ‘I never could. Je n’ai pas le
coeur assez large to love a whole asylum of horrid little
girls. Cela ne m’a jamais reussi. There are so many women
who have made themselves une position sociale in that
way. And now more than ever,’ she said with a mournful,
confiding expression, ostensibly addressing her brother,
but unmistakably intending her words only for Levin,
‘now when I have such need of some occupation, I
cannot.’ And suddenly frowning (Levin saw that she was
frowning at herself for talking about herself) she changed
the subject. ‘I know about you,’ she said to Levin; ‘that
Anna Karenina
1507 of 1759
you’re not a public-spirited citizen, and I have defended
you to the best of my ability.’
‘How have you defended me?’
‘Oh, according to the attacks made on you. But won’t
you have some tea?’ She rose and took up a book bound
in morocco.
‘Give it to me, Anna Arkadyevna,’ said Vorkuev,
indicating the book. ‘It’s well worth taking up.’
‘Oh, no, it’s all so sketchy.’
‘I told him about it,’ Stepan Arkadyevitch said to his
sister, nodding at Levin.
‘You shouldn’t have. My writing is something after the
fashion of those little baskets and carving which Liza
Mertsalova used to sell me from the prisons. She had the
direction of the prison department in that society,’ she
turned to Levin; ‘and they were miracles of patience, the
work of those poor wretches.’
And Levin saw a new trait in this woman, who
attracted him so extraordinarily. Besides wit, grace, and
beauty, she had truth. She had no wish to hide from him
all the bitterness of her position. As she said that she
sighed, and her face suddenly taking a hard expression,
looked as it were turned to stone. With that expression on
her face she was more beautiful than ever; but the
Anna Karenina
1508 of 1759
expression was new; it was utterly unlike that expression,
radiant with happiness and creating happiness, which had
been caught by the painter in her portrait. Levin looked
more than once at the portrait and at her figure, as taking
her brother’s arm she walked with him to the high doors
and he felt for her a tenderness and pity at which he
wondered himself.
She asked Levin and Vorkuev to go into the drawing
room, while she stayed behind to say a few words to her
brother. ‘About her divorce, about Vronsky, and what
he’s doing at the club, about me?’ wondered Levin. And
he was so keenly interested by the question of what she
was saying to Stepan Arkadyevitch, that he scarcely heard
what Vorkuev was telling him of the qualities of the story
for children Anna Arkadyevna had written.
At tea the same pleasant sort of talk, full of interesting
matter, continued. There was not a single instant when a
subject for conversation was to seek; on the contrary, it
was felt that one had hardly time to say what one had to
say, and eagerly held back to hear what the others were
saying. And all that was said, not only by her, but by
Vorkuev and Stepan Arkadyevitch—all, so it seemed to
Levin, gained peculiar significance from her appreciation
and her criticism. While he followed this interesting
Anna Karenina
1509 of 1759
conversation, Levin was all the time admiring her— her
beauty, her intelligence, her culture, and at the same time
her directness and genuine depth of feeling. He listened
and talked, and all the while he was thinking of her inner
life, trying to divine her feelings. And though he had
judged her so severely hitherto, now by some strange
chain of reasoning he was justifying her and was also sorry
for her, and afraid that Vronsky did not fully understand
her. At eleven o’clock, when Stepan Arkadyevitch got up
to go (Vorkuev had left earlier), it seemed to Levin that he
had only just come. Regretfully Levin too rose.
‘Good-bye,’ she said, holding his hand and glancing
into his face with a winning look. ‘I am very glad que la
glace est rompue.’
She dropped his hand, and half closed her eyes.
‘Tell your wife that I love her as before, and that if she
cannot pardon me my position, then my wish for her is
that she may never pardon it. To pardon it, one must go
through what I have gone through, and may God spare
her that.’
‘Certainly, yes, I will tell her...’ Levin said, blushing.
Anna Karenina
1510 of 1759
Chapter 11
‘What a marvelous, sweet and unhappy woman!’ he
was thinking, as he stepped out into the frosty air with
Stepan Arkadyevitch.
‘Well, didn’t I tell you?’ said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
seeing that Levin had been completely won over.
‘Yes,’ said Levin dreamily, ‘an extraordinary woman!
It’s not her cleverness, but she has such wonderful depth
of feeling. I’m awfully sorry for her!’
‘Now, please God everything will soon be settled.
Well, well, don’t be hard on people in future,’ said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, opening the carriage door. ‘Good-bye; we
don’t go the same way.’
Still thinking of Anna, of everything, even the simplest
phrase in their conversation with her, and recalling the
minutest changes in her expression, entering more and
more into her position, and feeling sympathy for her,
Levin reached home.
At home Kouzma told Levin that Katerina
Alexandrovna was quite well, and that her sisters had not
long been gone, and he handed him two letters. Levin
read them at once in the hall, that he might not over look
Anna Karenina
1511 of 1759
them later. One was from Sokolov, his bailiff. Sokolov
wrote that the corn could not be sold, that it was fetching
only five and a half roubles, and that more than that could
not be got for it. The other letter was from his sister. She
scolded him for her business being still unsettled.
‘Well, we must sell it at five and a half if we can’t get
more,’ Levin decided the first question, which had always
before seemed such a weighty one, with extraordinary
facility on the spot. ‘It’s extraordinary how all one’s time is
taken up here,’ he thought, considering the second letter.
He felt himself to blame for not having got done what his
sister had asked him to do for her. ‘Today, again, I’ve not
been to the court, but today I’ve certainly not had time.’
And resolving that he would not fail to do it next day, he
went up to his wife. As he went in, Levin rapidly ran
through mentally the day he had spent. All the events of
the day were conversations, conversations he had heard
and taken part in. All the conversations were upon subjects
which, if he had been alone at home, he would never
have taken up, but here they were very interesting. And
all these conversations were right enough, only in two
places there was something not quite right. One was what
he had said about the carp, the other was something not
Anna Karenina
1512 of 1759
‘quite the thing’ in the tender sympathy he was feeling for
Anna.
Levin found his wife low-spirited and dull. The dinner
of the three sisters had gone off very well, but then they
had waited and waited for him, all of them had felt dull,
the sisters had departed, and she had been left alone.
‘Well, and what have you been doing?’ she asked him,
looking straight into his eyes, which shone with rather a
suspicious brightness. But that she might not prevent his
telling her everything, she concealed her close scrutiny of
him, and with an approving smile listened to his account
of how he had spent the evening.
‘Well, I’m very glad I met Vronsky. I felt quite at ease
and natural with him. You understand, I shall try not to
see him, but I’m glad that this awkwardness is all over,’ he
said, and remembering that by way of trying not to see
him, he had immediately gone to call on Anna, he
blushed. ‘We talk about the peasants drinking; I don’t
know which drinks most, the peasantry or our own class;
the peasants do on holidays, but..’
But Kitty took not the slightest interest in discussing
the drinking habits of the peasants. She saw that he
blushed, and she wanted to know why.
‘Well, and then where did you go?’
Anna Karenina
1513 of 1759
‘Stiva urged me awfully to go and see Anna
Arkadyevna.’
And as he said this, Levin blushed even more, and his
doubts as to whether he had done right in going to see
Anna were settled once for all. He knew now that he
ought not to have done so.
Kitty’s eyes opened in a curious way and gleamed at
Anna’s name, but controlling herself with an effort, she
concealed her emotion and deceived him.
‘Oh!’ was all she said.
‘I’m sure you won’t be angry at my going. Stiva begged
me to, and Dolly wished it,’ Levin went on.
‘Oh, no!’ she said, but he saw in her eyes a constraint
that boded him no good.
‘She is a very sweet, very, very unhappy, good
woman,’ he said, telling her about Anna, her occupations,
and what she had told him to say to her.
‘Yes, of course, she is very much to be pitied,’ said
Kitty, when he had finished. ‘Whom was your letter
from?’
He told her, and believing in her calm tone, he went to
change his coat.
Anna Karenina
1514 of 1759
Coming back, he found Kitty in the same easy chair.
When he went up to her, she glanced at him and broke
into sobs.
‘What? what is it?’ he asked, knowing beforehand
what.
‘You’re in love with that hateful woman; she has
bewitched you! I saw it in your eyes. Yes, yes! What can it
all lead to? You were drinking at the club, drinking and
gambling, and then you went...to her of all people! No,
we must go away.... I shall go away tomorrow.’
It was a long while before Levin could soothe his wife.
At last he succeeded in calming her, only by confessing
that a feeling of pity, in conjunction with the wine he had
drunk, had been too much for him, that he had
succumbed to Anna’s artful influence, and that he would
avoid her. One thing he did with more sincerity confess to
was that living so long in Moscow, a life of nothing but
conversation, eating and drinking, he was degenerating.
They talked till three o’clock in the morning. Only at
three o’clock were they sufficiently reconciled to be able
to go to sleep.
Anna Karenina
1515 of 1759
Chapter 12
After taking leave of her guests, Anna did not sit down,
but began walking up and down the room. She had
unconsciously the whole evening done her utmost to
arouse in Levin a feeling of love—as of late she had fallen
into doing with all young men— and she knew she had
attained her aim, as far as was possible in one evening,
with a married and conscientious man. She liked him
indeed extremely, and, in spite of the striking difference,
from the masculine point of view, between Vronsky and
Levin, as a woman she saw something they had in
common, which had made Kitty able to love both. Yet as
soon as he was out of the room, she ceased to think of
him.
One thought, and one only, pursued her in different
forms, and refused to be shaken off. ‘If I have so much
effect on others, on this man, who loves his home and his
wife, why is it he is so cold to me?...not cold exactly, he
loves me, I know that! But something new is drawing us
apart now. Why wasn’t he here all the evening? He told
Stiva to say he could not leave Yashvin, and must watch
over his play. Is Yashvin a child? But supposing it’s true.
Anna Karenina
1516 of 1759
He never tells a lie. But there’s something else in it if it’s
true. He is glad of an opportunity of showing me that he
has other duties; I know that, I submit to that. But why
prove that to me? He wants to show me that his love for
me is not to interfere with his freedom. But I need no
proofs, I need love. He ought to understand all the
bitterness of this life for me here in Moscow. Is this life? I
am not living, but waiting for an event, which is
continually put off and put off. No answer again! And
Stiva says he cannot go to Alexey Alexandrovitch. And I
can’t write again. I can do nothing, can begin nothing, can
alter nothing; I hold myself in, I wait, inventing
amusements for myself—the English family, writing,
reading—but it’s all nothing but a sham, it’s all the same as
morphine. He ought to feel for me,’ she said, feeling tears
of self-pity coming into her eyes.
She heard Vronsky’s abrupt ring and hurriedly dried
her tears— not only dried her tears, but sat down by a
lamp and opened a book, affecting composure. She
wanted to show him that she was displeased that he had
not come home as he had promised— displeased only, and
not on any account to let him see her distress, and least of
all, her self-pity. She might pity herself, but he must not
pity her. She did not want strife, she blamed him for
Anna Karenina
1517 of 1759
wanting to quarrel, but unconsciously put herself into an
attitude of antagonism.
‘Well, you’ve not been dull?’ he said, eagerly and
good-humoredly, going up to her. ‘What a terrible passion
it is—gambling!’
‘No, I’ve not been dull; I’ve learned long ago not to be
dull. Stiva has been here and Levin.’
‘Yes, they meant to come and see you. Well, how did
you like Levin?’ he said, sitting down beside her.
‘Very much. They have not long been gone. What was
Yashvin doing?’
‘He was winning—seventeen thousand. I got him
away. He had really started home, but he went back again,
and now he’s losing.’
‘Then what did you stay for?’ she asked, suddenly
lifting her eyes to him. The expression of her face was
cold and ungracious. ‘You told Stiva you were staying on
to get Yashvin away. And you have left him there.’
The same expression of cold readiness for the conflict
appeared on his face too.
‘In the first place, I did not ask him to give you any
message; and secondly, I never tell lies. But what’s the
chief point, I wanted to stay, and I stayed,’ he said,
frowning. ‘Anna, what is it for, why will you?’ he said
Anna Karenina
1518 of 1759
after a moment’s silence, bending over towards her, and
he opened his hand, hoping she would lay hers in it.
She was glad of this appeal for tenderness. But some
strange force of evil would not let her give herself up to
her feelings, as though the rules of warfare would not
permit her to surrender.
‘Of course you wanted to stay, and you stayed. You do
everything you want to. But what do you tell me that for?
With what object?’ she said, getting more and more
excited. ‘Does anyone contest your rights? But you want
to be right, and you’re welcome to be right.’
His hand closed, he turned away, and his face wore a
still more obstinate expression.
‘For you it’s a matter of obstinacy,’ she said, watching
him intently and suddenly finding the right word for that
expression that irritated her, ‘simply obstinacy. For you it’s
a question of whether you keep the upper hand of me,
while for me....’ Again she felt sorry for herself, and she
almost burst into tears. ‘If you knew what it is for me!
When I feel as I do now that you are hostile, yes, hostile
to me, if you knew what this means for me! If you knew
how I feel on the brink of calamity at this instant, how
afraid I am of myself!’ And she turned away, hiding her
sobs.
Anna Karenina
1519 of 1759
‘But what are you talking about?’ he said, horrified at
her expression of despair, and again bending over her, he
took her hand and kissed it. ‘What is it for? Do I seek
amusements outside our home? Don’t I avoid the society
of women?’
‘Well, yes! If that were all!’ she said.
‘Come, tell me what I ought to do to give you peace of
mind? I am ready to do anything to make you happy,’ he
said, touched by her expression of despair; ‘what wouldn’t
I do to save you from distress of any sort, as now, Anna!’
he said.
‘It’s nothing, nothing!’ she said. ‘I don’t know myself
whether it’s the solitary life, my nerves.... Come, don’t let
us talk of it. What about the race? You haven’t told me!’
she inquired, trying to conceal her triumph at the victory,
which had anyway been on her side.
He asked for supper, and began telling her about the
races; but in his tone, in his eyes, which became more and
more cold, she saw that he did not forgive her for her
victory, that the feeling of obstinacy with which she had
been struggling had asserted itself again in him. He was
colder to her than before, as though he were regretting his
surrender. And she, remembering the words that had
given her the victory, ‘how I feel on the brink of calamity,
Anna Karenina
1520 of 1759
how afraid I am of myself,’ saw that this weapon was a
dangerous one, and that it could not be used a second
time. And she felt that beside the love that bound them
together there had grown up between them some evil
spirit of strife, which she could not exorcise from his, and
still less from her own heart.
Anna Karenina
1521 of 1759
Chapter 13
There are no conditions to which a man cannot
become used, especially if he sees that all around him are
living in the same way. Levin could not have believed
three months before that he could have gone quietly to
sleep in the condition in which he was that day, that
leading an aimless irrational life, living too beyond his
means, after drinking to excess (he could not call what
happened at the club anything else), forming
inappropriately friendly relations with a man with whom
his wife had once been in love, and a still more
inappropriate call upon a woman who could only be
called a lost woman, after being fascinated by that woman
and causing his wife distress—he could still go quietly to
sleep. But under the influence of fatigue, a sleepless night,
and the wine he had drunk, his sleep was sound and
untroubled.
At five o’clock the creak of a door opening waked him.
He jumped up and looked round. Kitty was not in bed
beside him. But there was a light moving behind the
screen, and he heard her steps.
Anna Karenina
1522 of 1759
‘What is it?...what is it?’ he said, half-asleep. ‘Kitty!
What is it?’
‘Nothing,’ she said, coming from behind the screen
with a candle in her hand. ‘I felt unwell,’ she said, smiling
a particularly sweet and meaning smile.
‘What? has it begun?’ he said in terror. ‘We ought to
send...’ and hurriedly he reached after his clothes.
‘No, no,’ she said, smiling and holding his hand. ‘It’s
sure to be nothing. I was rather unwell, only a little. It’s all
over now.’
And getting into bed, she blew out the candle, lay
down and was still. Though he thought her stillness
suspicious, as though she were holding her breath, and still
more suspicious the expression of peculiar tenderness and
excitement with which, as she came from behind the
screen, she said ‘nothing,’ he was so sleepy that he fell
asleep at once. Only later he remembered the stillness of
her breathing, and understood all that must have been
passing in her sweet, precious heart while she lay beside
him, not stirring, in anticipation of the greatest event in a
woman’s life. At seven o’clock he was waked by the touch
of her hand on his shoulder, and a gentle whisper. She
seemed struggling between regret at waking him, and the
desire to talk to him.
Anna Karenina
1523 of 1759
‘Kostya, don’t be frightened. It’s all right. But I fancy....
We ought to send for Lizaveta Petrovna.’
The candle was lighted again. She was sitting up in bed,
holding some knitting, which she had been busy upon
during the last few days.
‘Please, don’t be frightened, it’s all right. I’m not a bit
afraid,’ she said, seeing his scared face, and she pressed his
hand to her bosom and then to her lips.
He hurriedly jumped up, hardly awake, and kept his
eyes fixed on her, as he put on his dressing gown; then he
stopped, still looking at her. He had to go, but he could
not tear himself from her eyes. He thought he loved her
face, knew her expression, her eyes, but never had he seen
it like this. How hateful and horrible he seemed to
himself, thinking of the distress he had caused her
yesterday. Her flushed face, fringed with soft curling hair
under her night cap, was radiant with joy and courage.
Though there was so little that was complex or artificial
in Kitty’s character in general, Levin was struck by what
was revealed now, when suddenly all disguises were
thrown off and the very kernel of her soul shone in her
eyes. And in this simplicity and nakedness of her soul, she,
the very woman he loved in her, was more manifest than
ever. She looked at him, smiling; but all at once her brows
Anna Karenina
1524 of 1759
twitched, she threw up her head, and going quickly up to
him, clutched his hand and pressed close up to him,
breathing her hot breath upon him. She was in pain and
was, as it were, complaining to him of her suffering. And
for the first minute, from habit, it seemed to him that he
was to blame. But in her eyes there was a tenderness that
told him that she was far from reproaching him, that she
loved him for her sufferings. ‘If not I, who is to blame for
it?’ he thought unconsciously, seeking someone
responsible for this suffering for him to punish; but there
was no one responsible. She was suffering, complaining,
and triumphing in her sufferings, and rejoicing in them,
and loving them. He saw that something sublime was
being accomplished in her soul, but what? He could not
make it out. It was beyond his understanding.
‘I have sent to mamma. You go quickly to fetch
Lizaveta Petrovna ...Kostya!... Nothing, it’s over.’
She moved away from him and rang the bell.
‘Well, go now; Pasha’s coming. I am all right.’
And Levin saw with astonishment that she had taken
up the knitting she had brought in in the night and begun
working at it again.
As Levin was going out of one door, he heard the
maid-servant come in at the other. He stood at the door
Anna Karenina
1525 of 1759
and heard Kitty giving exact directions to the maid, and
beginning to help her move the bedstead.
He dressed, and while they were putting in his horses,
as a hired sledge was not to be seen yet, he ran again up to
the bedroom, not on tiptoe, it seemed to him, but on
wings. Two maid-servants were carefully moving
something in the bedroom.
Kitty was walking about knitting rapidly and giving
directions.
‘I’m going for the doctor. They have sent for Lizaveta
Petrovna, but I’ll go on there too. Isn’t there anything
wanted? Yes, shall I go to Dolly’s?’
She looked at him, obviously not hearing what he was
saying.
‘Yes, yes. Do go,’ she said quickly, frowning and
waving her hand to him.
He had just gone into the drawing room, when
suddenly a plaintive moan sounded from the bedroom,
smothered instantly. He stood still, and for a long while he
could not understand.
‘Yes, that is she,’ he said to himself, and clutching at his
head he ran downstairs.
‘Lord have mercy on us! pardon us! aid us!’ he repeated
the words that for some reason came suddenly to his lips.
Anna Karenina
1526 of 1759
And he, an unbeliever, repeated these words not with his
lips only. At that instant he knew that all his doubts, even
the impossibility of believing with his reason, of which he
was aware in himself, did not in the least hinder his
turning to God. All of that now floated out of his soul like
dust. To whom was he to turn if not to Him in whose
hands he felt himself, his soul, and his love?
The horse was not yet ready, but feeling a peculiar
concentration of his physical forces and his intellect on
what he had to do, he started off on foot without waiting
for the horse, and told Kouzma to overtake him.
At the corner he met a night cabman driving hurriedly.
In the little sledge, wrapped in a velvet cloak, sat Lizaveta
Petrovna with a kerchief round her head. ‘Thank God!
thank God!’ he said, overjoyed to recognize her little fair
face which wore a peculiarly serious, even stern
expression. Telling the driver not to stop, he ran along
beside her.
‘For two hours, then? Not more?’ she inquired. ‘You
should let Pyotr Dmitrievitch know, but don’t hurry him.
And get some opium at the chemist’s.’
‘So you think that it may go on well? Lord have mercy
on us and help us!’ Levin said, seeing his own horse
Anna Karenina
1527 of 1759
driving out of the gate. Jumping into the sledge beside
Konzma, he told him to drive to the doctor’s.
Anna Karenina
1528 of 1759
Chapter 14
The doctor was not yet up, and the footman said that
‘he had been up late, and had given orders not to be
waked, but would get up soon.’ The footman was
cleaning the lamp-chimneys, and seemed very busy about
them. This concentration of the footman upon his lamps,
and his indifference to what was passing in Levin, at first
astounded him, but immediately on considering the
question he realized that no one knew or was bound to
know his feelings, and that it was all the more necessary to
act calmly, sensibly, and resolutely to get through this wall
of indifference and attain his aim.
‘Don’t be in a hurry or let anything slip,’ Levin said to
himself, feeling a greater and greater flow of physical
energy and attention to all that lay before him to do.
Having ascertained that the doctor was not getting up,
Levin considered various plans, and decided on the
following one: that Konzma should go for another doctor,
while he himself should go to the chemist’s for opium,
and if when he came back the doctor had not yet begun to
get up, he would either by tipping the footman, or by
force, wake the doctor at all hazards.
Anna Karenina
1529 of 1759
At the chemist’s the lank shopman sealed up a packet of
powders for a coachman who stood waiting, and refused
him opium with the same callousness with which the
doctor’s footman had cleaned his lamp chimneys. Trying
not to get flurried or out of temper, Levin mentioned the
names of the doctor and midwife, and explaining what the
opium was needed for, tried to persuade him. The assistant
inquired in German whether he should give it, and
receiving an affirmative reply from behind the partition,
he took out a bottle and a funnel, deliberately poured the
opium from a bigger bottle into a little one, stuck on a
label, sealed it up, in spite of Levin’s request that he would
not do so, and was about to wrap it up too. This was more
than Levin could stand; he took the bottle firmly out of
his hands, and ran to the big glass doors. The doctor was
not even now getting up, and the footman, busy now in
putting down the rugs, refused to wake him. Levin
deliberately took out a ten rouble note, and, careful to
speak slowly, though losing no time over the business, he
handed him the note, and explained that Pyotr
Dmitrievitch (what a great and important personage he
seemed to Levin now, this Pyotr Dmitrievitch, who had
been of so little consequence in his eyes before!) had
Anna Karenina
1530 of 1759
promised to come at any time; that he would certainly not
be angry! and that he must therefore wake him at once.
The footman agreed, and went upstairs, taking Levin
into the waiting room.
Levin could hear through the door the doctor
coughing, moving about, washing, and saying something.
Three minutes passed; it seemed to Levin that more than
an hour had gone by. He could not wait any longer.
‘Pyotr Dmitrievitch, Pyotr Dmitrievitch!’ he said in an
imploring voice at the open door. ‘For God’s sake, forgive
me! See me as you are. It’s been going on more than two
hours already.’
‘I a minute; in a minute!’ answered a voice, and to his
amazement Levin heard that the doctor was smiling as he
spoke.
‘For one instant.’
‘In a minute.’
Two minutes more passed while the doctor was putting
on his boots, and two minutes more while the doctor put
on his coat and combed his hair.
‘Pyotr Dmitrievitch!’ Levin was beginning again in a
plaintive voice, just as the doctor came in dressed and
ready. ‘These people have no conscience,’ thought Levin.
‘Combing his hair, while we’re dying!’
Anna Karenina
1531 of 1759
‘Good morning!’ the doctor said to him, shaking hands,
and, as it were, teasing him with his composure. ‘There’s
no hurry. Well now?’
Trying to be as accurate as possible Levin began to tell
him every unnecessary detail of his wife’s condition,
interrupting his account repeatedly with entreaties that the
doctor would come with him at once.
‘Oh, you needn’t be in any hurry. You don’t
understand, you know. I’m certain I’m not wanted, still
I’ve promised, and if you like, I’ll come. But there’s no
hurry. Please sit down; won’t you have some coffee?’
Levin stared at him with eyes that asked whether he
was laughing at him; but the doctor had no notion of
making fun of him.
‘I know, I know,’ the doctor said, smiling; ‘I’m a
married man myself; and at these moments we husbands
are very much to be pitied. I’ve a patient whose husband
always takes refuge in the stables on such occasions.’
‘But what do you think, Pyotr Dmitrievitch? Do you
suppose it may go all right?’
‘Everything points to a favorable issue.’
‘So you’ll come immediately?’ said Levin, looking
wrathfully at the servant who was bringing in the coffee.
‘In an hour’s time.’
Anna Karenina
1532 of 1759
‘Oh, for mercy’s sake!’
‘Well, let me drink my coffee, anyway.’
The doctor started upon his coffee. Both were silent.
‘The Turks are really getting beaten, though. Did you
read yesterday’s telegrams?’ said the doctor, munching
some roll.
‘No, I can’t stand it!’ said Levin, jumping up. ‘So you’ll
be with us in a quarter of an hour.’
‘In half an hour.’
‘On your honor?’
When Levin got home, he drove up at the same time as
the princess, and they went up to the bedroom door
together. The princess had tears in her eyes, and her hands
were shaking. Seeing Levin, she embraced him, and burst
into tears.
‘Well, my dear Lizaveta Petrovna?’ she queried,
clasping the hand of the midwife, who came out to meet
them with a beaming and anxious face.
‘She’s going on well,’ she said; ‘persuade her to lie
down. She will be easier so.’
From the moment when he had waked up and
understood what was going on, Levin had prepared his
mind to bear resolutely what was before him, and without
considering or anticipating anything, to avoid upsetting his
Anna Karenina
1533 of 1759
wife, and on the contrary to soothe her and keep up her
courage. Without allowing himself even to think of what
was to come, of how it would end, judging from his
inquiries as to the usual duration of these ordeals, Levin
had in his imagination braced himself to bear up and to
keep a tight rein on his feelings for five hours, and it had
seemed to him he could do this. But when he came back
from the doctor’s and saw her sufferings again, he fell to
repeating more and more frequently: ‘Lord, have mercy
on us, and succor us!’ He sighed, and flung his head up,
and began to feel afraid he could not bear it, that he would
burst into tears or run away. Such agony it was to him.
And only one hour had passed.
But after that hour there passed another hour, two
hours, three, the full five hours he had fixed as the furthest
limit of his sufferings, and the position was still unchanged;
and he was still bearing it because there was nothing to be
done but bear it; every instant feeling that he had reached
the utmost limits of his endurance, and that his heart
would break with sympathy and pain.
But still the minutes passed by and the hours, and still
hours more, and his misery and horror grew and were
more and more intense.
Anna Karenina
1534 of 1759
All the ordinary conditions of life, without which one
can form no conception of anything, had ceased to exist
for Levin. He lost all sense of time. Minutes—those
minutes when she sent for him and he held her moist
hand, that would squeeze his hand with extraordinary
violence and then push it away—seemed to him hours,
and hours seemed to him minutes. He was surprised when
Lizaveta Petrovna asked him to light a candle behind a
screen, and he found that it was five o’clock in the
afternoon. If he had been told it was only ten o’clock in
the morning he would not have been more surprised.
Where he was all this time, he knew as little as the time of
anything. He saw her swollen face, sometimes bewildered
and in agony, sometimes smiling and trying to reassure
him. He saw the old princess too, flushed and
overwrought, with her gray curls in disorder, forcing
herself to gulp down her tears, biting her lips; he saw
Dolly too and the doctor, smoking fat cigarettes, and
Lizaveta Petrovna with a firm, resolute, reassuring face,
and the old prince walking up and down the hall with a
frowning face. But why they came in and went out,
where they were, he did not know. The princess was with
the doctor in the bedroom, then in the study, where a
table set for dinner suddenly appeared; then she was not
Anna Karenina
1535 of 1759
there, but Dolly was. Then Levin remembered he had
been sent somewhere. Once he had been sent to move a
table and sofa. He had done this eagerly, thinking it had to
be done for her sake, and only later on he found it was his
own bed he had been getting ready. Then he had been
sent to the study to ask the doctor something. The doctor
had answered and then had said something about the
irregularities in the municipal council. Then he had been
sent to the bedroom to help the old princess to move the
holy picture in its silver and gold setting, and with the
princess’s old waiting maid he had clambered on a shelf to
reach it and had broken the little lamp, and the old servant
had tried to reassure him about the lamp and about his
wife, and he carried the holy picture and set it at Kitty’s
head, carefully tucking it in behind the pillow. But where,
when, and why all this had happened, he could not tell.
He did not understand why the old princess took his hand,
and looking compassionately at him, begged him not to
worry himself, and Dolly persuaded him to eat something
and led him out of the room, and even the doctor looked
seriously and with commiseration at him and offered him a
drop of something.
All he knew and felt was that what was happening was
what had happened nearly a year before in the hotel of the
Anna Karenina
1536 of 1759
country town at the deathbed of his brother Nikolay. But
that had been grief— this was joy. Yet that grief and this
joy were alike outside all the ordinary conditions of life;
they were loopholes, as it were, in that ordinary life
through which there came glimpses of something sublime.
And in the contemplation of this sublime something the
soul was exalted to inconceivable heights of which it had
before had no conception, while reason lagged behind,
unable to keep up with it.
‘Lord, have mercy on us, and succor us!’ he repeated to
himself incessantly, feeling, in spite of his long and, as it
seemed, complete alienation from religion, that he turned
to God just as trustfully and simply as he had in his
childhood and first youth.
All this time he had two distinct spiritual conditions.
One was away from her, with the doctor, who kept
smoking one fat cigarette after another and extinguishing
them on the edge of a full ash tray, with Dolly, and with
the old prince, where there was talk about dinner, about
politics, about Marya Petrovna’s illness, and where Levin
suddenly forgot for a minute what was happening, and felt
as though he had waked up from sleep; the other was in
her presence, at her pillow, where his heart seemed
breaking and still did not break from sympathetic
Anna Karenina
1537 of 1759
suffering, and he prayed to God without ceasing. And
every time he was brought back from a moment of
oblivion by a scream reaching him from the bedroom, he
fell into the same strange terror that had come upon him
the first minute. Every time he heard a shriek, he jumped
up, ran to justify himself, remembered on the way that he
was not to blame, and he longed to defend her, to help
her. But as he looked at her, he saw again that help was
impossible, and he was filled with terror and prayed:
‘Lord, have mercy on us, and help us!’ And as time went
on, both these conditions became more intense; the
calmer he became away from her, completely forgetting
her, the more agonizing became both her sufferings and
his feeling of helplessness before them. He jumped up,
would have liked to run away, but ran to her.
Sometimes, when again and again she called upon him,
he blamed her; but seeing her patient, smiling face, and
hearing the words, ‘I am worrying you,’ he threw the
blame on God; but thinking of God, at once he fell to
beseeching God to forgive him and have mercy.
Anna Karenina
1538 of 1759
Chapter 15
He did not know whether it was late or early. The
candles had all burned out. Dolly had just been in the
study and had suggested to the doctor that he should lie
down. Levin sat listening to the doctor’s stories of a quack
mesmerizer and looking at the ashes of his cigarette. There
had been a period of repose, and he had sunk into
oblivion. He had completely forgotten what was going on
now. He heard the doctor’s chat and understood it.
Suddenly there came an unearthly shriek. The shriek was
so awful that Levin did not even jump up, but holding his
breath, gazed in terrified inquiry at the doctor. The doctor
put his head on one side, listened, and smiled approvingly.
Everything was so extraordinary that nothing could strike
Levin as strange. ‘I suppose it must be so,’ he thought, and
still sat where he was. Whose scream was this? He jumped
up, ran on tiptoe to the bedroom, edged round Lizaveta
Petrovna and the princess, and took up his position at
Kitty’s pillow. The scream had subsided, but there was
some change now. What it was he did not see and did not
comprehend, and he had no wish to see or comprehend.
But he saw it by the face of Lizaveta Petrovna. Lizaveta
Anna Karenina
1539 of 1759
Petrovna’s face was stern and pale, and still as resolute,
though her jaws were twitching, and her eyes were fixed
intently on Kitty. Kitty’s swollen and agonized face, a tress
of hair clinging to her moist brow, was turned to him and
sought his eyes. Her lifted hands asked for his hands.
Clutching his chill hands in her moist ones, she began
squeezing them to her face.
‘Don’t go, don’t go! I’m not afraid, I’m not afraid!’ she
said rapidly. ‘Mamma, take my earrings. They bother me.
You’re not afraid? Quick, quick, Lizaveta Petrovna..’
She spoke quickly, very quickly, and tried to smile. But
suddenly her face was drawn, she pushed him away.
‘Oh, this is awful! I’m dying, I’m dying! Go away!’ she
shrieked, and again he heard that unearthly scream.
Levin clutched at his head and ran out of the room.
‘It’s nothing, it’s nothing, it’s all right,’ Dolly called
after him.
But they might say what they liked, he knew now that
all was over. He stood in the next room, his head leaning
against the door post, and heard shrieks, howls such as he
had never heard before, and he knew that what had been
Kitty was uttering these shrieks. He had long ago ceased to
wish for the child. By now he loathed this child. He did
Anna Karenina
1540 of 1759
not even wish for her life now, all he longed for was the
end of this awful anguish.
‘Doctor! what is it? What is it? By God!’ he said,
snatching at the doctor’s hand as he came up.
‘It’s the end,’ said the doctor. And the doctor’s face was
so grave as he said it that Levin took THE END as
meaning her death.
Beside himself, he ran into the bedroom. The first
thing he saw was the face of Lizaveta Petrovna. It was
even more frowning and stern. Kitty’s face he did not
know. In the place where it had been was something that
was fearful in its strained distortion and in the sounds that
came from it. He fell down with his head on the wooden
framework of the bed, feeling that his heart was bursting.
The awful scream never paused, it became still more
awful, and as though it had reached the utmost limit of
terror, suddenly it ceased. Levin could not believe his ears,
but there could be no doubt; the scream had ceased and
he heard a subdued stir and bustle, and hurried breathing,
and her voice, gasping, alive, tender, and blissful, uttered
softly, ‘It’s over!’
He lifted his head. With her hands hanging exhausted
on the quilt, looking extraordinarily lovely and serene, she
looked at him in silence and tried to smile, and could not.
Anna Karenina
1541 of 1759
And suddenly, from the mysterious and awful far-away
world in which he had been living for the last twenty-two
hours, Levin felt himself all in an instant borne back to the
old every-day world, glorified though now, by such a
radiance of happiness that he could not bear it. The
strained chords snapped, sobs and tears of joy which he
had never foreseen rose up with such violence that his
whole body shook, that for long they prevented him from
speaking.
Falling on his knees before the bed, he held his wife’s
hand before his lips and kissed it, and the hand, with a
weak movement of the fingers, responded to his kiss. And
meanwhile, there at the foot of the bed, in the deft hands
of Lizaveta Petrovna, like a flickering light in a lamp, lay
the life of a human creature, which had never existed
before, and which would now with the same right, with
the same importance to itself, live and create in its own
image.
‘Alive! alive! And a boy too! Set your mind at rest!’
Levin heard Lizaveta Petrovna saying, as she slapped the
baby’s back with a shaking hand.
‘Mamma, is it true?’ said Kitty’s voice.
The princess’s sobs were all the answers she could
make. And in the midst of the silence there came in
Anna Karenina
1542 of 1759
unmistakable reply to the mother’s question, a voice quite
unlike the subdued voices speaking in the room. It was the
bold, clamorous, self-assertive squall of the new human
being, who had so incomprehensibly appeared.
If Levin had been told before that Kitty was dead, and
that he had died with her, and that their children were
angels, and that God was standing before him, he would
have been surprised at nothing. But now, coming back to
the world of reality, he had to make great mental efforts to
take in that she was alive and well, and that the creature
squalling so desperately was his son. Kitty was alive, her
agony was over. And he was unutterably happy. That he
understood; he was completely happy in it. But the baby?
Whence, why, who was he?... He could not get used to
the idea. It seemed to him something extraneous,
superfluous, to which he could not accustom himself.
Anna Karenina
1543 of 1759
Chapter 16
At ten o’clock the old prince, Sergey Ivanovitch, and
Stepan Arkadyevitch were sitting at Levin’s. Having
inquired after Kitty, they had dropped into conversation
upon other subjects. Levin heard them, and unconsciously,
as they talked, going over the past, over what had been up
to that morning, he thought of himself as he had been
yesterday till that point. It was as though a hundred years
had passed since then. He felt himself exalted to
unattainable heights, from which he studiously lowered
himself so as not to wound the people he was talking to.
He talked, and was all the time thinking of his wife, of her
condition now, of his son, in whose existence he tried to
school himself into believing. The whole world of
woman, which had taken for him since his marriage a new
value he had never suspected before, was now so exalted
that he could not take it in in his imagination. He heard
them talk of yesterday’s dinner at the club, and thought:
‘What is happening with her now? Is she asleep? How is
she? What is she thinking of? Is he crying, my son
Dmitri?’ And in the middle of the conversation, in the
Anna Karenina
1544 of 1759
middle of a sentence, he jumped up and went out of the
room.
‘Send me word if I can see her,’ said the prince.
‘Very well, in a minute,’ answered Levin, and without
stopping, he went to her room.
She was not asleep, she was talking gently with her
mother, making plans about the christening.
Carefully set to rights, with hair well-brushed, in a
smart little cap with some blue in it, her arms out on the
quilt, she was lying on her back. Meeting his eyes, her
eyes drew him to her. Her face, bright before, brightened
still more as he drew near her. There was the same change
in it from earthly to unearthly that is seen in the face of
the dead. But then it means farewell, here it meant
welcome. Again a rush of emotion, such as he had felt at
the moment of the child’s birth, flooded his heart. She
took his hand and asked him if he had slept. He could not
answer, and turned away, struggling with his weakness.
‘I have had a nap, Kostya!’ she said to him; ‘and I am so
comfortable now.’
She looked at him, but suddenly her expression
changed.
Anna Karenina
1545 of 1759
‘Give him to me,’ she said, hearing the baby’s cry.
‘Give him to me, Lizaveta Petrovna, and he shall look at
him.’
‘To be sure, his papa shall look at him,’ said Lizaveta
Petrovna, getting up and bringing something red, and
queer, and wriggling. ‘Wait a minute, we’ll make him tidy
first,’ and Lizaveta Petrovna laid the red wobbling thing
on the bed, began untrussing and trussing up the baby,
lifting it up and turning it over with one finger and
powdering it with something.
Levin, looking at the tiny, pitiful creature, made
strenuous efforts to discover in his heart some traces of
fatherly feeling for it. He felt nothing towards it but
disgust. But when it was undressed and he caught a
glimpse of wee, wee, little hands, little feet, saffroncolored, with little toes, too, and positively with a little big
toe different from the rest, and when he saw Lizaveta
Petrovna closing the wide-open little hands, as though
they were soft springs, and putting them into linen
garments, such pity for the little creature came upon him,
and such terror that she would hurt it, that he held her
hand back.
Lizaveta Petrovna laughed.
‘Don’t be frightened, don’t be frightened!’
Anna Karenina
1546 of 1759
When the baby had been put to rights and transformed
into a firm doll, Lizaveta Petrovna dandled it as though
proud of her handiwork, and stood a little away so that
Levin might see his son in all his glory.
Kitty looked sideways in the same direction, never
taking her eyes off the baby. ‘Give him to me! give him to
me!’ she said, and even made as though she would sit up.
‘What are you thinking of, Katerina Alexandrovna, you
mustn’t move like that! Wait a minute. I’ll give him to
you. Here we’re showing papa what a fine fellow we are!’
And Lizaveta Petrovna, with one hand supporting the
wobbling head, lifted up on the other arm the strange,
limp, red creature, whose head was lost in its swaddling
clothes. But it had a nose, too, and slanting eyes and
smacking lips.
‘A splendid baby!’ said Lizaveta Petrovna.
Levin sighed with mortification. This splendid baby
excited in him no feeling but disgust and compassion. It
was not at all the feeling he had looked forward to.
He turned away while Lizaveta Petrovna put the baby
to the unaccustomed breast.
Suddenly laughter made him look round. The baby had
taken the breast.
Anna Karenina
1547 of 1759
‘Come, that’s enough, that’s enough!’ said Lizaveta
Petrovna, but Kitty would not let the baby go. He fell
asleep in her arms.
‘Look, now,’ said Kitty, turning the baby so that he
could see it. The aged-looking little face suddenly
puckered up still more and the baby sneezed.
Smiling, hardly able to restrain his tears, Levin kissed
his wife and went out of the dark room. What he felt
towards this little creature was utterly unlike what he had
expected. There was nothing cheerful and joyous in the
feeling; on the contrary, it was a new torture of
apprehension. It was the consciousness of a new sphere of
liability to pain. And this sense was so painful at first, the
apprehension lest this helpless creature should suffer was so
intense, that it prevented him from noticing the strange
thrill of senseless joy and even pride that he had felt when
the baby sneezed.
Anna Karenina
1548 of 1759
Chapter 17
Stepan Arkadyevitch’s affairs were in a very bad way.
The money for two-thirds of the forest had all been
spent already, and he had borrowed from the merchant in
advance at ten per cent discount, almost all the remaining
third. The merchant would not give more, especially as
Darya Alexandrovna, for the first time that winter insisting
on her right to her own property, had refused to sign the
receipt for the payment of the last third of the forest. All
his salary went on household expenses and in payment of
petty debts that could not be put off. There was positively
no money.
This was unpleasant and awkward, and in Stepan
Arkadyevitch’s opinion things could not go on like this.
The explanation of the position was, in his view, to be
found in the fact that his salary was too small. The post he
filled had been unmistakably very good five years ago, but
it was so no longer.
Petrov, the bank director, had twelve thousand;
Sventitsky, a company director, had seventeen thousand;
Mitin, who had founded a bank, received fifty thousand.
Anna Karenina
1549 of 1759
‘Clearly I’ve been napping, and they’ve overlooked
me,’ Stepan Arkadyevitch thought about himself. And he
began keeping his eyes and ears open, and towards the end
of the winter he had discovered a very good berth and had
formed a plan of attack upon it, at first from Moscow
through aunts, uncles, and friends, and then, when the
matter was well advanced, in the spring, he went himself
to Petersburg. It was one of those snug, lucrative berths of
which there are so many more nowadays than there used
to be, with incomes ranging from one thousand to fifty
thousand roubles. It was the post of secretary of the
committee of the amalgamated agency of the southern
railways, and of certain banking companies. This position,
like all such appointments, called for such immense energy
and such varied qualifications, that it was difficult for them
to be found united in any one man. And since a man
combining all the qualifications was not to be found, it
was at least better that the post be filled by an honest than
by a dishonest man. And Stepan Arkadyevitch was not
merely an honest man—unemphatically—in the common
acceptation of the words, he was an honest man—
emphatically—in that special sense which the word has in
Moscow, when they talk of an ‘honest’ politician, an
‘honest’ writer, an ‘honest’ newspaper, an ‘honest’
Anna Karenina
1550 of 1759
institution, an ‘honest’ tendency, meaning not simply that
the man or the institution is not dishonest, but that they
are capable on occasion of taking a line of their own in
opposition to the authorities.
Stepan Arkadyevitch moved in those circles in Moscow
in which that expression had come into use, was regarded
there as an honest man, and so had more right to this
appointment than others.
The appointment yielded an income of from seven to
ten thousand a year, and Oblonsky could fill it without
giving up his government position. It was in the hands of
two ministers, one lady, and two Jews, and all these
people, though the way had been paved already with
them, Stepan Arkadyevitch had to see in Petersburg.
Besides this business, Stepan Arkadyevitch had promised
his sister Anna to obtain from Karenin a definite answer
on the question of divorce. And begging fifty roubles from
Dolly, he set off for Petersburg.
Stepan Arkadyevitch sat in Karenin’s study listening to
his report on the causes of the unsatisfactory position of
Russian finance, and only waiting for the moment when
he would finish to speak about his own business or about
Anna.
Anna Karenina
1551 of 1759
‘Yes, that’s very true,’ he said, when Alexey
Alexandrovitch took off the pince-nez, without which he
could not read now, and looked inquiringly at his former
brother-in-law, ‘that’s very true in particular cases, but still
the principle of our day is freedom.’
‘Yes, but I lay down another principle, embracing the
principle of freedom,’ said Alexey Alexandrovitch, with
emphasis on the word ‘embracing,’ and he put on his
pince-nez again, so as to read the passage in which this
statement was made. And turning over the beautifully
written, wide-margined manuscript, Alexey
Alexandrovitch read aloud over again the conclusive
passage.
‘I don’t advocate protection for the sake of private
interests, but for the public weal, and for the lower and
upper classes equally,’ he said, looking over his pince-nez
at Oblonsky. ‘But THEY cannot grasp that, THEY are
taken up now with personal interests, and carried away by
phrases.’
Stepan Arkadyevitch knew that when Karenin began to
talk of what THEY were doing and thinking, the persons
who would not accept his report and were the cause of
everything wrong in Russia, that it was coming near the
end. And so now he eagerly abandoned the principle of
Anna Karenina
1552 of 1759
free-trade, and fully agreed. Alexey Alexandrovitch
paused, thoughtfully turning over the pages of his
manuscript.
‘Oh, by the way,’ said Stepan Arkadyevitch, ‘I wanted
to ask you, some time when you see Pomorsky, to drop
him a hint that I should be very glad to get that new
appointment of secretary of the committee of the
amalgamated agency of the southern railways and banking
companies.’ Stepan Arkadyevitch was familiar by now
with the title of the post he coveted, and he brought it out
rapidly without mistake.
Alexey Alexandrovitch questioned him as to the duties
of this new committee, and pondered. He was considering
whether the new committee would not be acting in some
way contrary to the views he had been advocating. But as
the influence of the new committee was of a very
complex nature, and his views were of very wide
application, he could not decide this straight off, and
taking off his pince-nez, he said:
‘Of course, I can mention it to him; but what is your
reason precisely for wishing to obtain the appointment?’
‘It’s a good salary, rising to nine thousand, and my
means..’
Anna Karenina
1553 of 1759
‘Nine thousand!’ repeated Alexey Alexandrovitch, and
he frowned. The high figure of the salary made him reflect
that on that side Stepan Arkadyevitch’s proposed position
ran counter to the main tendency of his own projects of
reform, which always leaned towards economy.
‘I consider, and I have embodied my views in a note
on the subject, that in our day these immense salaries are
evidence of the unsound economic assiette of our
finances.’
‘But what’s to be done?’ said Stepan Arkadyevitch.
‘Suppose a bank director gets ten thousand—well, he’s
worth it; or an engineer gets twenty thousand—after all,
it’s a growing thing, you know!’
‘I assume that a salary is the price paid for a
commodity, and it ought to conform with the law of
supply and demand. If the salary is fixed without any
regard for that law, as, for instance, when I see two
engineers leaving college together, both equally well
trained and efficient, and one getting forty thousand while
the other is satisfied with two; or when I see lawyers and
hussars, having no special qualifications, appointed
directors of banking companies with immense salaries, I
conclude that the salary is not fixed in accordance with the
law of supply and demand, but simply through personal
Anna Karenina
1554 of 1759
interest. And this is an abuse of great gravity in itself, and
one that reacts injuriously on the government service. I
consider..’
Stepan Arkadyevitch made haste to interrupt his
brother-in-law.
‘Yes; but you must agree that it’s a new institution of
undoubted utility that’s being started. After all, you know,
it’s a growing thing! What they lay particular stress on is
the thing being carried on honestly,’ said Stepan
Arkadyevitch with emphasis.
But the Moscow significance of the word ‘honest’ was
lost on Alexey Alexandrovitch.
‘Honesty is only a negative qualification,’ he said.
‘Well, you’ll do me a great service, anyway,’ said
Stepan Arkadyevitch, ‘by putting in a word to
Pomorsky—just in the way of conversation...’
‘But I fancy it’s more in Volgarinov’s hands,’ said
Alexey Alexandrovitch.
‘Volgarinov has fully assented, as far as he’s concerned,’
said Stepan Arkadyevitch, turning red. Stepan
Arkadyevitch reddened at the mention of that name,
because he had been that morning at the Jew Volgarinov’s,
and the visit had left an unpleasant recollection.
Anna Karenina
1555 of 1759
Stepan Arkadyevitch believed most positively that the
committee in which he was trying to get an appointment
was a new, genuine, and honest public body, but that
morning when Volgarinov had— intentionally, beyond a
doubt—kept him two hours waiting with other petitioners
in his waiting room, he had suddenly felt uneasy.
Whether he was uncomfortable that he, a descendant of
Rurik, Prince Oblonsky, had been kept for two hours
waiting to see a Jew, or that for the first time in his life he
was not following the example of his ancestors in serving
the government, but was turning off into a new career,
anyway he was very uncomfortable. During those two
hours in Volgarinov’s waiting room Stepan Arkadyevitch,
stepping jauntily about the room, pulling his whiskers,
entering into conversation with the other petitioners, and
inventing an epigram on his position, assiduously
concealed from others, and even from himself, the feeling
he was experiencing.
But all the time he was uncomfortable and angry, he
could not have said why—whether because he could not
get his epigram just right, or from some other reason.
When at last Volgarinov had received him with
exaggerated politeness and unmistakable triumph at his
humiliation, and had all but refused the favor asked of
Anna Karenina
1556 of 1759
him, Stepan Arkadyevitch had made haste to forget it all as
soon as possible. And now, at the mere recollection, he
blushed.
Anna Karenina
1557 of 1759
Chapter 18
‘Now there is something I want to talk about, and you
know what it is. About Anna,’ Stepan Arkadyevitch said,
pausing for a brief space, and shaking off the unpleasant
impression.
As soon as Oblonsky uttered Anna’s name, the face of
Alexey Alexandrovitch was completely transformed; all the
life was gone out of it, and it looked weary and dead.
‘What is it exactly that you want from me?’ he said,
moving in his chair and snapping his pince-nez.
‘A definite settlement, Alexey Alexandrovitch, some
settlement of the position. I’m appealing to you’ ("not as
an injured husband,’ Stepan Arkadyevitch was going to
say, but afraid of wrecking his negotiation by this, he
changed the words) ‘not as a statesman’ (which did not
sound a propos), ‘but simply as a man, and a good-hearted
man and a Christian. You must have pity on her,’ he said.
‘That is, in what way precisely?’ Karenin said softly.
‘Yes, pity on her. If you had seen her as I have!—I
have been spending all the winter with her—you would
have pity on her. Her position is awful, simply awful!’
Anna Karenina
1558 of 1759
‘I had imagined,’ answered Alexey Alexandrovitch in a
higher, almost shrill voice, ‘that Anna Arkadyevna had
everything she had desired for herself.’
‘Oh, Alexey Alexandrovitch, for heaven’s sake, don’t
let us indulge in recriminations! What is past is past, and
you know what she wants and is waiting for—divorce.’
‘But I believe Anna Arkadyevna refuses a divorce, if I
make it a condition to leave me my son. I replied in that
sense, and supposed that the matter was ended. I consider
it at an end,’ shrieked Alexey Alexandrovitch.
‘But, for heaven’s sake, don’t get hot!’ said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, touching his brother-in-law’s knee. ‘The
matter is not ended. If you will allow me to recapitulate, it
was like this: when you parted, you were as magnanimous
as could possibly be; you were ready to give her
everything—freedom, divorce even. She appreciated that.
No, don’t think that. She did appreciate it—to such a
degree that at the first moment, feeling how she had
wronged you, she did not consider and could not consider
everything. She gave up everything. But experience, time,
have shown that her position is unbearable, impossible.’
‘The life of Anna Arkadyevna can have no interest for
me,’ Alexey Alexandrovitch put in, lifting his eyebrows.
Anna Karenina
1559 of 1759
‘Allow me to disbelieve that,’ Stepan Arkadyevitch
replied gently. ‘Her position is intolerable for her, and of
no benefit to anyone whatever. She has deserved it, you
will say. She knows that and asks you for nothing; she says
plainly that she dare not ask you. But I, all of us, her
relatives, all who love her, beg you, entreat you. Why
should she suffer? Who is any the better for it?’
‘Excuse me, you seem to put me in the position of the
guilty party,’ observed Alexey Alexandrovitch.
‘Oh, no, oh, no, not at all! please understand me,’ said
Stepan Arkadyevitch, touching his hand again, as though
feeling sure this physical contact would soften his brotherin-law. ‘All I say is this: her position is intolerable, and it
might be alleviated by you, and you will lose nothing by
it. I will arrange it all for you, so that you’ll not notice it.
You did promise it, you know.’
‘The promise was given before. And I had supposed
that the question of my son had settled the matter. Besides,
I had hoped that Anna Arkadyevna had enough
generosity...’ Alexey Alexandrovitch articulated with
difficulty, his lips twitching and his face white.
‘She leaves it all to your generosity. She begs, she
implores one thing of you—to extricate her from the
impossible position in which she is placed. She does not
Anna Karenina
1560 of 1759
ask for her son now. Alexey Alexandrovitch, you are a
good man. Put yourself in her position for a minute. The
question of divorce for her in her position is a question of
life and death. If you had not promised it once, she would
have reconciled herself to her position, she would have
gone on living in the country. But you promised it, and
she wrote to you, and moved to Moscow. And here she’s
been for six months in Moscow, where every chance
meeting cuts her to the heart, every day expecting an
answer. Why, it’s like keeping a condemned criminal for
six months with the rope round his neck, promising him
perhaps death, perhaps mercy. Have pity on her, and I will
undertake to arrange everything. Vos scrupules..’
‘I am not talking about that, about that...’ Alexey
Alexandrovitch interrupted with disgust. ‘But, perhaps, I
promised what I had no right to promise.’
‘So you go back from your promise?’
‘I have never refused to do all that is possible, but I
want time to consider how much of what I promised is
possible.’
‘No, Alexey Alexandrovitch!’ cried Oblonsky, jumping
up, ‘I won’t believe that! She’s unhappy as only an
unhappy woman can be, and you cannot refuse in such..’
Anna Karenina
1561 of 1759
‘As much of what I promised as is possible. Vous
professez d’etre libre penseur. But I as a believer cannot, in
a matter of such gravity, act in opposition to the Christian
law.’
‘But in Christian societies and among us, as far as I’m
aware, divorce is allowed,’ said Stepan Arkadyevitch.
‘Divorce is sanctioned even by our church. And we see..’
‘It is allowed, but not in the sense..’
‘Alexey Alexandrovitch, you are not like yourself,’ said
Oblonsky, after a brief pause. ‘Wasn’t it you (and didn’t
we all appreciate it in you?) who forgave everything, and
moved simply by Christian feeling was ready to make any
sacrifice? You said yourself: if a man take thy coat, give
him thy cloak also, and now..’
‘I beg,’ said Alexey Alexandrovitch shrilly, getting
suddenly onto his feet, his face white and his jaws
twitching, ‘I beg you to drop this...to drop...this subject!’
‘Oh, no! Oh, forgive me, forgive me if I have
wounded you,’ said Stepan Arkadyevitch, holding out his
hand with a smile of embarrassment; ‘but like a messenger
I have simply performed the commission given me.’
Alexey Alexandrovitch gave him his hand, pondered a
little, and said:
Anna Karenina
1562 of 1759
‘I must think it over and seek for guidance. The day
after tomorrow I will give you a final answer,’ he said,
after considering a moment.
Anna Karenina
1563 of 1759
Chapter 19
Stepan Arkadyevitch was about to go away when
Korney came in to announce:
‘Sergey Alexyevitch!’
‘Who’s Sergey Alexyevitch?’ Stepan Arkadyevitch was
beginning, but he remembered immediately.
‘Ah, Seryozha!’ he said aloud. ‘Sergey Alexeitch! I
thought it was the director of a department. Anna asked
me to see him too,’ he thought.
And he recalled the timid, piteous expression with
which Anna had said to him at parting: ‘Anyway, you will
see him. Find out exactly where he is, who is looking after
him. And Stiva...if it were possible! Could it be possible?’
Stepan Arkadyevitch knew what was meant by that ‘if it
were possible,’—if it were possible to arrange the divorce
so as to let her have her son.... Stepan Arkadyevitch saw
now that it was no good to dream of that, but still he was
glad to see his nephew.
Alexey Alexandrovitch reminded his brother-in-law
that they never spoke to the boy of his mother, and he
begged him not to mention a single word about her.
Anna Karenina
1564 of 1759
‘He was very ill after that interview with his mother,
which we had not foreseen,’ said Alexey Alexandrovitch.
‘Ideed, we feared for his life. But with rational treatment,
and sea-bathing in the summer, he regained his strength,
and now, by the doctor’s advice, I have let him go to
school. And certainly the companionship of school has had
a good effect on him, and he is perfectly well, and making
good progress.’
‘What a fine fellow he’s grown! He’s not Seryozha
now, but quite full-fledged Sergey Alexeitch!’ said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, smiling, as he looked at the handsome,
broad-shouldered lad in blue coat and long trousers, who
walked in alertly and confidently. The boy looked healthy
and good-humored. He bowed to his uncle as to a
stranger, but recognizing him, he blushed and turned
hurriedly away from him, as though offended and irritated
at something. The boy went up to his father and handed
him a note of the marks he had gained in school.
‘Well, that’s very fair,’ said his father, ‘you can go.’
‘He’s thinner and taller, and has grown out of being a
child into a boy; I like that,’ said Stepan Arkadyevitch.
‘Do you remember me?’
The boy looked back quickly at his uncle.
Anna Karenina
1565 of 1759
‘Yes, mon oncle,’ he answered, glancing at his father,
and again he looked downcast.
His uncle called him to him, and took his hand.
‘Well, and how are you getting on?’ he said, wanting to
talk to him, and not knowing what to say.
The boy, blushing and making no answer, cautiously
drew his hand away. As soon as Stepan Arkadyevitch let
go his hand, he glanced doubtfully at his father, and like a
bird set free, he darted out of the room.
A year had passed since the last time Seryozha had seen
his mother. Since then he had heard nothing more of her.
And in the course of that year he had gone to school, and
made friends among his schoolfellows. The dreams and
memories of his mother, which had made him ill after
seeing her, did not occupy his thoughts now. When they
came back to him, he studiously drove them away,
regarding them as shameful and girlish, below the dignity
of a boy and a schoolboy. He knew that his father and
mother were separated by some quarrel, he knew that he
had to remain with his father, and he tried to get used to
that idea.
He disliked seeing his uncle, so like his mother, for it
called up those memories of which he was ashamed. He
disliked it all the more as from some words he had caught
Anna Karenina
1566 of 1759
as he waited at the study door, and still more from the
faces of his father and uncle, he guessed that they must
have been talking of his mother. And to avoid
condemning the father with whom he lived and on whom
he was dependent, and, above all, to avoid giving way to
sentimentality, which he considered so degrading,
Seryozha tried not to look at his uncle who had come to
disturb his peace of mind, and not to think of what he
recalled to him.
But when Stepan Arkadyevitch, going out after him,
saw him on the stairs, and calling to him, asked him how
he spent his playtime at school, Seryozha talked more
freely to him away from his father’s presence.
‘We have a railway now,’ he said in answer to his
uncle’s question. ‘It’s like this, do you see: two sit on a
bench— they’re the passengers; and one stands up straight
on the bench. And all are harnessed to it by their arms or
by their belts, and they run through all the rooms—the
doors are left open beforehand. Well, and it’s pretty hard
work being the conductor!’
‘That’s the one that stands?’ Stepan Arkadyevitch
inquired, smiling.
Anna Karenina
1567 of 1759
‘Yes, you want pluck for it, and cleverness too,
especially when they stop all of a sudden, or someone falls
down.’
‘Yes, that must be a serious matter,’ said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, watching with mournful interest the eager
eyes, like his mother’s; not childish now—no longer fully
innocent. And though he had promised Alexey
Alexandrovitch not to speak of Anna, he could not
restrain himself.
‘Do you remember your mother?’ he asked suddenly.
‘No, I don’t,’ Seryozha said quickly. He blushed
crimson, and his face clouded over. And his uncle could
get nothing more out of him. His tutor found his pupil on
the staircase half an hour later, and for a long while he
could not make out whether he was ill-tempered or
crying.
‘What is it? I expect you hurt yourself when you fell
down?’ said the tutor. ‘I told you it was a dangerous game.
And we shall have to speak to the director.’
‘If I had hurt myself, nobody should have found it out,
that’s certain.’
‘Well, what is it, then?’
‘Leave me alone! If I remember, or if I don’t
remember?...what business is it of his? Why should I
Anna Karenina
1568 of 1759
remember? Leave me in peace!’ he said, addressing not his
tutor, but the whole world.
Anna Karenina
1569 of 1759
Chapter 20
Stepan Arkadyevitch, as usual, did not waste his time in
Petersburg. In Petersburg, besides business, his sister’s
divorce, and his coveted appointment, he wanted, as he
always did, to freshen himself up, as he said, after the
mustiness of Moscow.
In spite of its cafes chantants and its omnibuses,
Moscow was yet a stagnant bog. Stepan Arkadyevitch
always felt it. After living for some time in Moscow,
especially in close relations with his family, he was
conscious of a depression of spirits. After being a long time
in Moscow without a change, he reached a point when he
positively began to be worrying himself over his wife’s illhumor and reproaches, over his children’s health and
education, and the petty details of his official work; even
the fact of being in debt worried him. But he had only to
go and stay a little while in Petersburg, in the circle there
in which he moved, where people lived—really lived—
instead of vegetating as in Moscow, and all such ideas
vanished and melted away at once, like wax before the
fire. His wife?... Only that day he had been talking to
Prince Tchetchensky. Prince Tchetchensky had a wife and
Anna Karenina
1570 of 1759
family, grown-up pages in the corps,...and he had another
illegitimate family of children also. Though the first family
was very nice too, Prince Tchetchensky felt happier in his
second family; and he used to take his eldest son with him
to his second family, and told Stepan Arkadyevitch that he
thought it good for his son, enlarging his ideas. What
would have been said to that in Moscow?
His children? In Petersburg children did not prevent
their parents from enjoying life. The children were
brought up in schools, and there was no trace of the wild
idea that prevailed in Moscow, in Lvov’s household, for
instance, that all the luxuries of life were for the children,
while the parents have nothing but work and anxiety.
Here people understood that a man is in duty bound to
live for himself, as every man of culture should live.
His official duties? Official work here was not the stiff,
hopeless drudgery that it was in Moscow. Here there was
some interest in official life. A chance meeting, a service
rendered, a happy phrase, a knack of facetious mimicry,
and a man’s career might be made in a trice. So it had
been with Bryantsev, whom Stepan Arkadyevitch had met
the previous day, and who was one of the highest
functionaries in government now. There was some
interest in official work like that.
Anna Karenina
1571 of 1759
The Petersburg attitude on pecuniary matters had an
especially soothing effect on Stepan Arkadyevitch.
Bartnyansky, who must spend at least fifty thousand to
judge by the style he lived in, had made an interesting
comment the day before on that subject.
As they were talking before dinner, Stepan
Arkadyevitch said to Bartnyansky:
‘You’re friendly, I fancy, with Mordvinsky; you might
do me a favor: say a word to him, please, for me. There’s
an appointment I should like to get—secretary of the
agency..’
‘Oh, I shan’t remember all that, if you tell it to me....
But what possesses you to have to do with railways and
Jews?... Take it as you will, it’s a low business.’
Stepan Arkadyevitch did not say to Bartnyansky that it
was a ‘growing thing’—Bartnyansky would not have
understood that.
‘I want the money, I’ve nothing to live on.’
‘You’re living, aren’t you?’
‘Yes, but in debt.’
‘Are you, though? Heavily?’ said Bartnyansky
sympathetically.
‘Very heavily: twenty thousand.’
Bartnyansky broke into good-humored laughter.
Anna Karenina
1572 of 1759
‘Oh, lucky fellow!’ said he. ‘My debts mount up to a
million and a half, and I’ve nothing, and still I can live, as
you see!’
And Stepan Arkadyevitch saw the correctness of this
view not in words only but in actual fact. Zhivahov owed
three hundred thousand, and hadn’t a farthing to bless
himself with, and he lived, and in style too! Count
Krivtsov was considered a hopeless case by everyone, and
yet he kept two mistresses. Petrovsky had run through five
millions, and still lived in just the same style, and was even
a manager in the financial department with a salary of
twenty thousand. But besides this, Petersburg had
physically an agreeable effect on Stepan Arkadyevitch. It
made him younger. In Moscow he sometimes found a
gray hair in his head, dropped asleep after dinner,
stretched, walked slowly upstairs, breathing heavily, was
bored by the society of young women, and did not dance
at balls. In Petersburg he always felt ten years younger.
His experience in Petersburg was exactly what had
been described to him on the previous day by Prince
Pyotr Oblonsky, a man of sixty, who had just come back
from abroad:
‘We don’t know the way to live here,’ said Pyotr
Oblonsky. ‘I spent the summer in Baden, and you
Anna Karenina
1573 of 1759
wouldn’t believe it, I felt quite a young man. At a glimpse
of a pretty woman, my thoughts.... One dines and drinks a
glass of wine, and feels strong and ready for anything. I
came home to Russia—had to see my wife, and, what’s
more, go to my country place; and there, you’d hardly
believe it, in a fortnight I’d got into a dressing gown and
given up dressing for dinner. Needn’t say I had no
thoughts left for pretty women. I became quite an old
gentleman. There was nothing left for me but to think of
my eternal salvation. I went off to Paris—I was as right as
could be at once.’
Stepan Arkadyevitch felt exactly the difference that
Pyotr Oblonsky described. In Moscow he degenerated so
much that if he had had to be there for long together, he
might in good earnest have come to considering his
salvation; in Petersburg he felt himself a man of the world
again.
Between Princess Betsy Tverskaya and Stepan
Arkadyevitch there had long existed rather curious
relations. Stepan Arkadyevitch always flirted with her in
jest, and used to say to her, also in jest, the most unseemly
things, knowing that nothing delighted her so much. The
day after his conversation with Karenin, Stepan
Arkadyevitch went to see her, and felt so youthful that in
Anna Karenina
1574 of 1759
this jesting flirtation and nonsense he recklessly went so far
that he did not know how to extricate himself, as
unluckily he was so far from being attracted by her that he
thought her positively disagreeable. What made it hard to
change the conversation was the fact that he was very
attractive to her. So that he was considerably relieved at
the arrival of Princess Myakaya, which cut short their tetea-tete.
‘Ah, so you’re here!’ said she when she saw him. ‘Well,
and what news of your poor sister? You needn’t look at
me like that,’ she added. ‘Ever since they’ve all turned
against her, all those who’re a thousand times worse than
she, I’ve thought she did a very fine thing. I can’t forgive
Vronsky for not letting me know when she was in
Petersburg. I’d have gone to see her and gone about with
her everywhere. Please give her my love. Come, tell me
about her.’
‘Yes, her position is very difficult; she...’ began Stepan
Arkadyevitch, in the simplicity of his heart accepting as
sterling coin Princess Myakaya’s words ‘tell me about her.’
Princess Myakaya interrupted him immediately, as she
always did, and began talking herself.
‘She’s done what they all do, except me—only they
hide it. But she wouldn’t be deceitful, and she did a fine
Anna Karenina
1575 of 1759
thing. And she did better still in throwing up that crazy
brother-in-law of yours. You must excuse me. Everybody
used to say he was so clever, so very clever; I was the only
one that said he was a fool. Now that he’s so thick with
Lidia Ivanovna and Landau, they all say he’s crazy, and I
should prefer not to agree with everybody, but this time I
can’t help it.’
‘Oh, do please explain,’ said Stepan Arkadyevitch;
‘what does it mean? Yesterday I was seeing him on my
sister’s behalf, and I asked him to give me a final answer.
He gave me no answer, and said he would think it over.
But this morning, instead of an answer, I received an
invitation from Countess Lidia Ivanovna for this evening.’
‘Ah, so that’s it, that’s it!’ said Princess Myakaya
gleefully, ‘they’re going to ask Landau what he’s to say.’
‘Ask Landau? What for? Who or what’s Landau?’
‘What! you don’t know Jules Landau, le fameux Jules
Landau, le clairvoyant? He’s crazy too, but on him your
sister’s fate depends. See what comes of living in the
provinces—you know nothing about anything. Landau,
do you see, was a commis in a shop in Paris, and he went
to a doctor’s; and in the doctor’s waiting room he fell
asleep, and in his sleep he began giving advice to all the
patients. And wonderful advice it was! Then the wife of
Anna Karenina
1576 of 1759
Yury Meledinsky—you know, the invalid?—heard of this
Landau, and had him to see her husband. And he cured
her husband, though I can’t say that I see he did him
much good, for he’s just as feeble a creature as ever he
was, but they believed in him, and took him along with
them and brought him to Russia. Here there’s been a
general rush to him, and he’s begun doctoring everyone.
He cured Countess Bezzubova, and she took such a fancy
to him that she adopted him.’
‘Adopted him?’
‘Yes, as her son. He’s not Landau any more now, but
Count Bezzubov. That’s neither here nor there, though;
but Lidia—I’m very fond of her, but she has a screw loose
somewhere—has lost her heart to this Landau now, and
nothing is settled now in her house or Alexey
Alexandrovitch’s without him, and so your sister’s fate is
now in the hands of Landau, alias Count Bezzubov.’
Anna Karenina
1577 of 1759
Chapter 21
After a capital dinner and a great deal of cognac drunk
at Bartnyansky’s, Stepan Arkadyevitch, only a little later
than the appointed time, went in to Countess Lidia
Ivanovna’s.
‘Who else is with the countess?—a Frenchman?’ Stepan
Arkadyevitch asked the hall porter, as he glanced at the
familiar overcoat of Alexey Alexandrovitch and a queer,
rather artless-looking overcoat with clasps.
‘Alexey Alexandrovitch Karenin and Count Bezzubov,’
the porter answered severely.
‘Princess Myakaya guessed right,’ thought Stepan
Arkadyevitch, as he went upstairs. ‘Curious! It would be
quite as well, though, to get on friendly terms with her.
She has immense influence. If she would say a word to
Pomorsky, the thing would be a certainty.’
It was still quite light out-of-doors, but in Countess
Lidia Ivanovna’s little drawing room the blinds were
drawn and the lamps lighted. At a round table under a
lamp sat the countess and Alexey Alexandrovitch, talking
softly. A short, thinnish man, very pale and handsome,
with feminine hips and knock-kneed legs, with fine
Anna Karenina
1578 of 1759
brilliant eyes and long hair lying on the collar of his coat,
was standing at the end of the room gazing at the portraits
on the wall. After greeting the lady of the house and
Alexey Alexandrovitch, Stepan Arkadyevitch could not
resist glancing once more at the unknown man.
‘Monsieur Landau!’ the countess addressed him with a
softness and caution that impressed Oblonsky. And she
introduced them.
Landau looked round hurriedly, came up, and smiling,
laid his moist, lifeless hand in Stepan Arkadyevitch’s
outstretched hand and immediately walked away and fell
to gazing at the portraits again. The countess and Alexey
Alexandrovitch looked at each other significantly.
‘I am very glad to see you, particularly today,’ said
Countess Lidia Ivanovna, pointing Stepan Arkadyevitch to
a seat beside Karenin.
‘I introduced you to him as Landau,’ she said in a soft
voice, glancing at the Frenchman and again immediately
after at Alexey Alexandrovitch, ‘but he is really Count
Bezzubov, as you’re probably aware. Only he does not
like the title.’
‘Yes, I heard so,’ answered Stepan Arkadyevitch; ‘they
say he completely cured Countess Bezzubova.’
Anna Karenina
1579 of 1759
‘She was here today, poor thing!’ the countess said,
turning to Alexey Alexandrovitch. ‘This separation is
awful for her. It’s such a blow to her!’
‘And he positively is going?’ queried Alexey
Alexandrovitch.
‘Yes, he’s going to Paris. He heard a voice yesterday,’
said Countess Lidia Ivanovna, looking at Stepan
Arkadyevitch.
‘Ah, a voice!’ repeated Oblonsky, feeling that he must
be as circumspect as he possibly could in this society,
where something peculiar was going on, or was to go on,
to which he had not the key.
A moment’s silence followed, after which Countess
Lidia Ivanovna, as though approaching the main topic of
conversation, said with a fine smile to Oblonsky:
‘I’ve known you for a long while, and am very glad to
make a closer acquaintance with you. Les amis de nos amis
sont nos amis. But to be a true friend, one must enter into
the spiritual state of one’s friend, and I fear that you are
not doing so in the case of Alexey Alexandrovitch. You
understand what I mean?’ she said, lifting her fine pensive
eyes.
‘In part, countess, I understand the position of Alexey
Alexandrovitch...’ said Oblonsky. Having no clear idea
Anna Karenina
1580 of 1759
what they were talking about, he wanted to confine
himself to generalities.
‘The change is not in his external position,’ Countess
Lidia Ivanovna said sternly, following with eyes of love the
figure of Alexey Alexandrovitch as he got up and crossed
over to Landau; ‘his heart is changed, a new heart has been
vouchsafed him, and I fear you don’t fully apprehend the
change that has taken place in him.’
‘Oh, well, in general outlines I can conceive the
change. We have always been friendly, and now...’ said
Stepan Arkadyevitch, responding with a sympathetic
glance to the expression of the countess, and mentally
balancing the question with which of the two ministers
she was most intimate, so as to know about which to ask
her to speak for him.
‘The change that has taken place in him cannot lessen
his love for his neighbors; on the contrary, that change can
only intensify love in his heart. But I am afraid you do not
understand me. Won’t you have some tea?’ she said, with
her eyes indicating the footman, who was handing round
tea on a tray.
‘Not quite, countess. Of course, his misfortune..’
‘Yes, a misfortune which has proved the highest
happiness, when his heart was made new, was filled full of
Anna Karenina
1581 of 1759
it,’ she said, gazing with eyes full of love at Stepan
Arkadyevitch.
‘I do believe I might ask her to speak to both of them,’
thought Stepan Arkadyevitch.
‘Oh, of course, countess,’ he said; ‘but I imagine such
changes are a matter so private that no one, even the most
intimate friend, would care to speak of them.’
‘On the contrary! We ought to speak freely and help
one another.’
‘Yes, undoubtedly so, but there is such a difference of
convictions, and besides...’ said Oblonsky with a soft
smile.
‘There can be no difference where it is a question of
holy truth.’
‘Oh, no, of course; but...’ and Stepan Arkadyevitch
paused in confusion. He understood at last that they were
talking of religion.
‘I fancy he will fall asleep immediately,’ said Alexey
Alexandrovitch in a whisper full of meaning, going up to
Lidia Ivanovna.
Stepan Arkadyevitch looked round. Landau was sitting
at the window, leaning on his elbow and the back of his
chair, his head drooping. Noticing that all eyes were
Anna Karenina
1582 of 1759
turned on him he raised his head and smiled a smile of
childlike artlessness.
‘Don’t take any notice,’ said Lidia Ivanovna, and she
lightly moved a chair up for Alexey Alexandrovitch. ‘I
have observed...’ she was beginning, when a footman
came into the room with a letter. Lidia Ivanovna rapidly
ran her eyes over the note, and excusing herself, wrote an
answer with extraordinary rapidity, handed it to the man,
and came back to the table. ‘I have observed,’ she went
on, ‘that Moscow people, especially the men, are more
indifferent to religion than anyone.’
‘Oh, no, countess, I thought Moscow people had the
reputation of being the firmest in the faith,’ answered
Stepan Arkadyevitch.
‘But as far as I can make out, you are unfortunately one
of the indifferent ones,’ said Alexey Alexandrovitch,
turning to him with a weary smile.
‘How anyone can be indifferent!’ said Lidia Ivanovna.
‘I am not so much indifferent on that subject as I am
waiting in suspense,’ said Stepan Arkadyevitch, with his
most deprecating smile. ‘I hardly think that the time for
such questions has come yet for me.’
Alexey Alexandrovitch and Lidia Ivanovna looked at
each other.
Anna Karenina
1583 of 1759
‘We can never tell whether the time has come for us or
not,’ said Alexey Alexandrovitch severely. ‘We ought not
to think whether we are ready or not ready. God’s grace is
not guided by human considerations: sometimes it comes
not to those that strive for it, and comes to those that are
unprepared, like Saul.’
‘No, I believe it won’t be just yet,’ said Lidia Ivanovna,
who had been meanwhile watching the movements of the
Frenchman. Landau got up and came to them.
‘Do you allow me to listen?’ he asked.
‘Oh, yes; I did not want to disturb you,’ said Lidia
Ivanovna, gazing tenderly at him; ‘sit here with us.’
‘One has only not to close one’s eyes to shut out the
light,’ Alexey Alexandrovitch went on.
‘Ah, if you knew the happiness we know, feeling His
presence ever in our hearts!’ said Countess Lidia Ivanovna
with a rapturous smile.
‘But a man may feel himself unworthy sometimes to
rise to that height,’ said Stepan Arkadyevitch, conscious of
hypocrisy in admitting this religious height, but at the
same time unable to bring himself to acknowledge his
free-thinking views before a person who, by a single word
to Pomorsky, might procure him the coveted
appointment.
Anna Karenina
1584 of 1759
‘That is, you mean that sin keeps him back?’ said Lidia
Ivanovna. ‘But that is a false idea. There is no sin for
believers, their sin has been atoned for. Pardon,’ she
added, looking at the footman, who came in again with
another letter. She read it and gave a verbal answer:
‘Tomorrow at the Grand Duchess’s, say.’ ‘For the believer
sin is not,’ she went on.
‘Yes, but faith without works is dead,’ said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, recalling the phrase from the catechism, and
only by his smile clinging to his independence.
‘There you have it—from the epistle of St. James,’ said
Alexey Alexandrovitch, addressing Lidia Ivanovna, with a
certain reproachfulness in his tone. It was unmistakably a
subject they had discussed more than once before. ‘What
harm has been done by the false interpretation of that
passage! Nothing holds men back from belief like that
misinterpretation. ‘I have not works, so I cannot believe,’
though all the while that is not said. But the very opposite
is said.’
‘Striving for God, saving the soul by fasting,’ said
Countess Lidia Ivanovna, with disgusted contempt, ‘those
are the crude ideas of our monks.... Yet that is nowhere
said. It is far simpler and easier,’ she added, looking at
Oblonsky with the same encouraging smile with which at
Anna Karenina
1585 of 1759
court she encouraged youthful maids of honor,
disconcerted by the new surroundings of the court.
‘We are saved by Christ who suffered for us. We are
saved by faith,’ Alexey Alexandrovitch chimed in, with a
glance of approval at her words.
‘Vous comprenez l’anglais?’ asked Lidia Ivanovna, and
receiving a reply in the affirmative, she got up and began
looking through a shelf of books.
‘I want to read him ‘Safe and Happy,’ or ‘Under the
Wing,’’ she said, looking inquiringly at Karenin. And
finding the book, and sitting down again in her place, she
opened it. ‘It’s very short. In it is described the way by
which faith can be reached, and the happiness, above all
earthly bliss, with which it fills the soul. The believer
cannot be unhappy because he is not alone. But you will
see.’ She was just settling herself to read when the footman
came in again. ‘Madame Borozdina? Tell her, tomorrow at
two o’clock. Yes,’ she said, putting her finger in the place
in the book, and gazing before her with her fine pensive
eyes, ‘that is how true faith acts. You know Marie Sanina?
You know about her trouble? She lost her only child. She
was in despair. And what happened? She found this
comforter, and she thanks God now for the death of her
child. Such is the happiness faith brings!’
Anna Karenina
1586 of 1759
‘Oh, yes, that is most...’ said Stepan Arkadyevitch, glad
they were going to read, and let him have a chance to
collect his faculties. ‘No, I see I’d better not ask her about
anything today,’ he thought. ‘If only I can get out of this
without putting my foot in it!’
‘It will be dull for you,’ said Countess Lidia Ivanovna,
addressing Landau; ‘you don’t know English, but it’s
short.’
‘Oh, I shall understand,’ said Landau, with the same
smile, and he closed his eyes. Alexey Alexandrovitch and
Lidia Ivanovna exchanged meaningful glances, and the
reading began.
Anna Karenina
1587 of 1759
Chapter 22
Stepan Arkadyevitch felt completely nonplussed by the
strange talk which he was hearing for the first time. The
complexity of Petersburg, as a rule, had a stimulating effect
on him, rousing him out of his Moscow stagnation. But
he liked these complications, and understood them only in
the circles he knew and was at home in. In these
unfamiliar surroundings he was puzzled and disconcerted,
and could not get his bearings. As he listened to Countess
Lidia Ivanovna, aware of the beautiful, artless—or perhaps
artful, he could not decide which—eyes of Landau fixed
upon him, Stepan Arkadyevitch began to be conscious of a
peculiar heaviness in his head.
The most incongruous ideas were in confusion in his
head. ‘Marie Sanina is glad her child’s dead.... How good a
smoke would be now!... To be saved, one need only
believe, and the monks don’t know how the thing’s to be
done, but Countess Lidia Ivanovna does know.... And
why is my head so heavy? Is it the cognac, or all this being
so queer? Anyway, I fancy I’ve done nothing unsuitable so
far. But anyway, it won’t do to ask her now. They say
they make one say one’s prayers. I only hope they won’t
Anna Karenina
1588 of 1759
make me! That’ll be too imbecile. And what stuff it is
she’s reading! but she has a good accent. Landau—
Bezzubov— what’s he Bezzubov for?’ All at once Stepan
Arkadyevitch became aware that his lower jaw was
uncontrollably forming a yawn. He pulled his whiskers to
cover the yawn, and shook himself together. But soon
after he became aware that he was dropping asleep and on
the very point of snoring. He recovered himself at the
very moment when the voice of Countess Lidia Ivanovna
was saying ‘he’s asleep.’ Stepan Arkadyevitch started with
dismay, feeling guilty and caught. But he was reassured at
once by seeing that the words ‘he’s asleep’ referred not to
him, but to Landau. The Frenchman was asleep as well as
Stepan Arkadyevitch. But Stepan Arkadyevitch’s being
asleep would have offended them, as he thought (though
even this, he thought, might not be so, as everything
seemed so queer), while Landau’s being asleep delighted
them extremely, especially Countess Lidia Ivanovna.
‘Mon ami,’ said Lidia Ivanovna, carefully holding the
folds of her silk gown so as not to rustle, and in her
excitement calling Karenin not Alexey Alexandrovitch,
but ‘mon ami,’ ‘donnez-lui la main. Vous voyez? Sh!’ she
hissed at the footman as he came in again. ‘Not at home.’
Anna Karenina
1589 of 1759
The Frenchman was asleep, or pretending to be asleep,
with his head on the back of his chair, and his moist hand,
as it lay on his knee, made faint movements, as though
trying to catch something. Alexey Alexandrovitch got up,
tried to move carefully, but stumbled against the table,
went up and laid his hand in the Frenchman’s hand.
Stepan Arkadyevitch got up too, and opening his eyes
wide, trying to wake himself up if he were asleep, he
looked first at one and then at the other. It was all real.
Stepan Arkadyevitch felt that his head was getting worse
and worse.
‘Que la personne qui est arrivee la derniere, celle qui
demande, qu’elle sorte! Qu’elle sorte!’ articulated the
Frenchman, without opening his eyes.
‘Vous m’excuserez, mais vous voyez.... Revenez vers
dix heures, encore mieux demain.’
‘Qu’elle sorte!’ repeated the Frenchman impatiently.
‘C’est moi, n’est-ce pas?’ And receiving an answer in
the affirmative, Stepan Arkadyevitch, forgetting the favor
he had meant to ask of Lidia Ivanovna, and forgetting his
sister’s affairs, caring for nothing, but filled with the sole
desire to get away as soon as possible, went out on tiptoe
and ran out into the street as though from a plague-
Anna Karenina
1590 of 1759
stricken house. For a long while he chatted and joked
with his cab-driver, trying to recover his spirits.
At the French theater where he arrived for the last act,
and afterwards at the Tatar restaurant after his champagne,
Stepan Arkadyevitch felt a little refreshed in the
atmosphere he was used to. But still he felt quite unlike
himself all that evening.
On getting home to Pyotr Oblonsky’s, where he was
staying, Stepan Arkadyevitch found a note from Betsy. She
wrote to him that she was very anxious to finish their
interrupted conversation, and begged him to come next
day. He had scarcely read this note, and frowned at its
contents, when he heard below the ponderous tramp of
the servants, carrying something heavy.
Stepan Arkadyevitch went out to look. It was the
rejuvenated Pyotr Oblonsky. He was so drunk that he
could not walk upstairs; but he told them to set him on his
legs when he saw Stepan Arkadyevitch, and clinging to
him, walked with him into his room and there began
telling him how he had spent the evening, and fell asleep
doing so.
Stepan Arkadyevitch was in very low spirits, which
happened rarely with him, and for a long while he could
not go to sleep. Everything he could recall to his mind,
Anna Karenina
1591 of 1759
everything was disgusting; but most disgusting of all, as if
it were something shameful, was the memory of the
evening he had spent at Countess Lidia Ivanovna’s.
Next day he received from Alexey Alexandrovitch a
final answer, refusing to grant Anna’s divorce, and he
understood that this decision was based on what the
Frenchman had said in his real or pretended trance.
Anna Karenina
1592 of 1759
Chapter 23
In order to carry through any undertaking in family
life, there must necessarily be either complete division
between the husband and wife, or loving agreement.
When the relations of a couple are vacillating and neither
one thing nor the other, no sort of enterprise can be
undertaken.
Many families remain for years in the same place,
though both husband and wife are sick of it, simply
because there is neither complete division nor agreement
between them.
Both Vronsky and Anna felt life in Moscow
insupportable in the heat and dust, when the spring
sunshine was followed by the glare of summer, and all the
trees in the boulevards had long since been in full leaf, and
the leaves were covered with dust. But they did not go
back to Vozdvizhenskoe, as they had arranged to do long
before; they went on staying in Moscow, though they
both loathed it, because of late there had been no
agreement between them.
The irritability that kept them apart had no external
cause, and all efforts to come to an understanding
Anna Karenina
1593 of 1759
intensified it, instead of removing it. It was an inner
irritation, grounded in her mind on the conviction that his
love had grown less; in his, on regret that he had put
himself for her sake in a difficult position, which she,
instead of lightening, made still more difficult. Neither of
them gave full utterance to their sense of grievance, but
they considered each other in the wrong, and tried on
every pretext to prove this to one another.
In her eyes the whole of him, with all his habits, ideas,
desires, with all his spiritual and physical temperament, was
one thing—love for women, and that love, she felt, ought
to be entirely concentrated on her alone. That love was
less; consequently, as she reasoned, he must have
transferred part of his love to other women or to another
woman—and she was jealous. She was jealous not of any
particular woman but of the decrease of his love. Not
having got an object for her jealousy, she was on the
lookout for it. At the slightest hint she transferred her
jealousy from one object to another. At one time she was
jealous of those low women with whom he might so
easily renew his old bachelor ties; then she was jealous of
the society women he might meet; then she was jealous of
the imaginary girl whom he might want to marry, for
whose sake he would break with her. And this last form of
Anna Karenina
1594 of 1759
jealousy tortured her most of all, especially as he had
unwarily told her, in a moment of frankness, that his
mother knew him so little that she had had the audacity to
try and persuade him to marry the young Princess
Sorokina.
And being jealous of him, Anna was indignant against
him and found grounds for indignation in everything. For
everything that was difficult in her position she blamed
him. The agonizing condition of suspense she had passed
in Moscow, the tardiness and indecision of Alexey
Alexandrovitch, her solitude—she put it all down to him.
If he had loved her he would have seen all the bitterness of
her position, and would have rescued her from it. For her
being in Moscow and not in the country, he was to blame
too. He could not live buried in the country as she would
have liked to do. He must have society, and he had put
her in this awful position, the bitterness of which he
would not see. And again, it was his fault that she was
forever separated from her son.
Even the rare moments of tenderness that came from
time to time did not soothe her; in his tenderness now she
saw a shade of complacency, of self-confidence, which had
not been of old and which exasperated her.
Anna Karenina
1595 of 1759
It was dusk. Anna was alone, and waiting for him to
come back from a bachelor dinner. She walked up and
down in his study (the room where the noise from the
street was least heard), and thought over every detail of
their yesterday’s quarrel. Going back from the wellremembered, offensive words of the quarrel to what had
been the ground of it, she arrived at last at its origin. For a
long while she could hardly believe that their dissension
had arisen from a conversation so inoffensive, of so little
moment to either. But so it actually had been. It all arose
from his laughing at the girls’ high schools, declaring they
were useless, while she defended them. He had spoken
slightingly of women’s education in general, and had said
that Hannah, Anna’s English protegee, had not the
slightest need to know anything of physics.
This irritated Anna. She saw in this a contemptuous
reference to her occupations. And she bethought her of a
phrase to pay him back for the pain he had given her. ‘I
don’t expect you to understand me, my feelings, as anyone
who loved me might, but simple delicacy I did expect,’
she said.
And he had actually flushed with vexation, and had said
something unpleasant. She could not recall her answer, but
Anna Karenina
1596 of 1759
at that point, with an unmistakable desire to wound her
too, he had said:
‘I feel no interest in your infatuation over this girl,
that’s true, because I see it’s unnatural.’
The cruelty with which he shattered the world she had
built up for herself so laboriously to enable her to endure
her hard life, the injustice with which he had accused her
of affectation, of artificiality, aroused her.
‘I am very sorry that nothing but what’s coarse and
material is comprehensible and natural to you,’ she said
and walked out of the room.
When he had come in to her yesterday evening, they
had not referred to the quarrel, but both felt that the
quarrel had been smoothed over, but was not at an end.
Today he had not been at home all day, and she felt so
lonely and wretched in being on bad terms with him that
she wanted to forget it all, to forgive him, and be
reconciled with him; she wanted to throw the blame on
herself and to justify him.
‘I am myself to blame. I’m irritable, I’m insanely
jealous. I will make it up with him, and we’ll go away to
the country; there I shall be more at peace.’
‘Unnatural!’ she suddenly recalled the word that had
stung her most of all, not so much the word itself as the
Anna Karenina
1597 of 1759
intent to wound her with which it was said. ‘I know what
he meant; he meant— unnatural, not loving my own
daughter, to love another person’s child. What does he
know of love for children, of my love for Seryozha,
whom I’ve sacrificed for him? But that wish to wound
me! No, he loves another woman, it must be so.’
And perceiving that, while trying to regain her peace of
mind, she had gone round the same circle that she had
been round so often before, and had come back to her
former state of exasperation, she was horrified at herself.
‘Can it be impossible? Can it be beyond me to control
myself?’ she said to herself, and began again from the
beginning. ‘He’s truthful, he’s honest, he loves me. I love
him, and in a few days the divorce will come. What more
do I want? I want peace of mind and trust, and I will take
the blame on myself. Yes, now when he comes in, I will
tell him I was wrong, though I was not wrong, and we
will go away tomorrow.’
And to escape thinking any more, and being overcome
by irritability, she rang, and ordered the boxes to be
brought up for packing their things for the country.
At ten o’clock Vronsky came in.
Anna Karenina
1598 of 1759
Chapter 24
‘Well, was it nice?’ she asked, coming out to meet him
with a penitent and meek expression.
‘Just as usual,’ he answered, seeing at a glance that she
was in One of her good moods. He was used by now to
these transitions, and he was particularly glad to see it
today, as he was in a specially good humor himself.
‘What do I see? Come, that’s good!’ he said, pointing
to the boxes in the passage.
‘Yes, we must go. I went out for a drive, and it was so
fine I longed to be in the country. There’s nothing to
keep you, is there?’
‘It’s the one thing I desire. I’ll be back directly, and
we’ll talk it over; I only want to change my coat. Order
some tea.’
And he went into his room.
There was something mortifying in the way he had said
‘Come, that’s good,’ as one says to a child when it leaves
off being naughty, and still more mortifying was the
contrast between her penitent and his self-confident tone;
and for one instant she felt the lust of strife rising up in her
Anna Karenina
1599 of 1759
again, but making an effort she conquered it, and met
Vronsky as good-humoredly as before.
When he came in she told him, partly repeating phrases
she had prepared beforehand, how she had spent the day,
and her plans for going away.
‘You know it came to me almost like an inspiration,’
she said. ‘Why wait here for the divorce? Won’t it be just
the same in the country? I can’t wait any longer! I don’t
want to go on hoping, I don’t want to hear anything
about the divorce. I have made up my mind it shall not
have any more influence on my life. Do you agree?’
‘Oh, yes!’ he said, glancing uneasily at her excited face.
‘What did you do? Who was there?’ she said, after a
pause.
Vronsky mentioned the names of the guests. ‘The
dinner was first rate, and the boat race, and it was all
pleasant enough, but in Moscow they can never do
anything without something ridicule. A lady of a sort
appeared on the scene, teacher of swimming to the Queen
of Sweden, and gave us an exhibition of her skill.’
‘How? did she swim?’ asked Anna, frowning.
‘In an absurd red costume de natation; she was old and
hideous too. So when shall we go?’
Anna Karenina
1600 of 1759
‘What an absurd fancy! Why, did she swim in some
special way, then?’ said Anna, not answering.
‘There was absolutely nothing in it. That’s just what I
say, it was awfully stupid. Well, then, when do you think
of going?’
Anna shook her head as though trying to drive away
some unpleasant idea.
‘When? Why, the sooner the better! By tomorrow we
shan’t be ready. The day after tomorrow.’
‘Yes...oh, no, wait a minute! The day after tomorrow’s Sunday, I have to be at maman’s,’ said Vronsky,
embarrassed, because as soon as he uttered his mother’s
name he was aware of her intent, suspicious eyes. His
embarrassment confirmed her suspicion. She flushed hotly
and drew away from him. It was now not the Queen of
Sweden’s swimming-mistress who filled Anna’s
imagination, but the young Princess Sorokina. She was
staying in a village near Moscow with Countess
Vronskaya.
‘Can’t you go tomorrow?’ she said.
‘Well, no! The deeds and the money for the business
I’m going there for I can’t get by tomorrow,’ he
answered.
‘If so, we won’t go at all.’
Anna Karenina
1601 of 1759
‘But why so?’
‘I shall not go later. Monday or never!’
‘What for?’ said Vronsky, as though in amazement.
‘Why, there’s no meaning in it!’
‘There’s no meaning in it to you, because you care
nothing for me. You don’t care to understand my life.
The one thing that I cared for here was Hannah. You say
it’s affectation. Why, you said yesterday that I don’t love
my daughter, that I love this English girl, that it’s
unnatural. I should like to know what life there is for me
that could be natural!’
For an instant she had a clear vision of what she was
doing, and was horrified at how she had fallen away from
her resolution. But even though she knew it was her own
ruin, she could not restrain herself, could not keep herself
from proving to him that he was wrong, could not give
way to him.
‘I never said that; I said I did not sympathize with this
sudden passion.’
‘How is it, though you boast of your
straightforwardness, you don’t tell the truth?’
‘I never boast, and I never tell lies,’ he said slowly,
restraining his rising anger. ‘It’s a great pity if you can’t
respect..’
Anna Karenina
1602 of 1759
‘Respect was invented to cover the empty place where
love should be. And if you don’t love me any more, it
would be better and more honest to say so.’
‘No, this is becoming unbearable!’ cried Vronsky,
getting up from his chair; and stopping short, facing her,
he said, speaking deliberately: ‘What do you try my
patience for?’ looking as though he might have said much
more, but was restraining himself. ‘It has limits.’
‘What do you mean by that?’ she cried, looking with
terror at the undisguised hatred in his whole face, and
especially in his cruel, menacing eyes
‘I mean to say...’ he was beginning, but he checked
himself. ‘I must ask what it is you want of me?’
‘What can I want? All I can want is that you should not
desert me, as you think of doing,’ she said, understanding
all he had not uttered. ‘But that I don’t want; that’s
secondary. I want love, and there is none. So then all is
over.’
She turned towards the door.
‘Stop! sto—op!’ said Vronsky, with no change in the
gloomy lines of his brows, though he held her by the
hand. ‘What is it all about? I said that we must put off
going for three days, and on that you told me I was lying,
that I was not an honorable man.’
Anna Karenina
1603 of 1759
‘Yes, and I repeat that the man who reproaches me
with having sacrificed everything for me,’ she said,
recalling the words of a still earlier quarrel, ‘that he’s worse
than a dishonorable man— he’s a heartless man.’
‘Oh, there are limits to endurance!’ he cried, and
hastily let go her hand.
‘He hates me, that’s clear,’ she thought, and in silence,
without looking round, she walked with faltering steps out
of the room. ‘He loves another woman, that’s even
clearer,’ she said to herself as she went into her own room.
‘I want love, and there is none. So, then, all is over.’ She
repeated the words she had said, ‘and it must be ended.’
‘But how?’ she asked herself, and she sat down in a low
chair before the looking glass.
Thoughts of where she would go now, whether to the
aunt who had brought her up, to Dolly, or simply alone
abroad, and of what he was doing now alone in his study;
whether this was the final quarrel, or whether
reconciliation were still possible; and of what all her old
friends at Petersburg would say of her now; and of how
Alexey Alexandrovitch would look at it, and many other
ideas of what would happen now after this rupture, came
into her head; but she did not give herself up to them with
all her heart. At the bottom of her heart was some obscure
Anna Karenina
1604 of 1759
idea that alone interested her, but she could not get clear
sight of it. Thinking once more of Alexey Alexandrovitch,
she recalled the time of her illness after her confinement,
and the feeling which never left her at that time. ‘Why
didn’t I die?’ and the words and the feeling of that time
came back to her. And all at once she knew what was in
her soul. Yes, it was that idea which alone solved all. ‘Yes,
to die!... And the shame and disgrace of Alexey
Alexandrovitch and of Seryozha, and my awful shame, it
will all be saved by death. To die! and he will feel
remorse; will be sorry; will love me; he will suffer on my
account.’ With the trace of a smile of commiseration for
herself she sat down in the armchair, taking off and putting
on the rings on her left hand, vividly picturing from
different sides his feelings after her death.
Approaching footsteps—his steps—distracted her
attention. As though absorbed in the arrangement of her
rings, she did not even turn to him.
He went up to her, and taking her by the hand, said
softly:
‘Anna, we’ll go the day after tomorrow, if you like. I
agree to everything.’
She did not speak.
‘What is it?’ he urged.
Anna Karenina
1605 of 1759
‘You know,’ she said, and at the same instant, unable to
restrain herself any longer, she burst into sobs.
‘Cast me off!’ she articulated between her sobs. ‘I’ll go
away tomorrow...I’ll do more. What am I? An immoral
woman! A stone round your neck. I don’t want to make
you wretched, I don’t want to! I’ll set you free. You don’t
love me; you love someone else!’
Vronsky besought her to be calm, and declared that
there was no trace of foundation for her jealousy; that he
had never ceased, and never would cease, to love her; that
he loved her more than ever.
‘Anna, why distress yourself and me so?’ he said to her,
kissing her hands. There was tenderness now in his face,
and she fancied she caught the sound of tears in his voice,
and she felt them wet on her hand. And instantly Anna’s
despairing jealousy changed to a despairing passion of
tenderness. She put her arms round him, and covered with
kisses his head, his neck, his hands.
Anna Karenina
1606 of 1759
Chapter 25
Feeling that the reconciliation was complete, Anna set
eagerly to to work in the morning preparing for their
departure. Though it was not settled whether they should
go on Monday or Tuesday, as they had each given way to
the other, Anna packed busily, feeling absolutely
indifferent whether they went a day earlier or later. She
was standing in her room over an open box, taking things
out of it, when he came in to see her earlier than usually,
dressed to go out.
‘I’m going off at once to see maman; she can send me
the money by Yegorov. And I shall be ready to go
tomorrow,’ he said.
Though she was in such a good mood, the thought of
his visit to his mother’s gave her a pang.
‘No, I shan’t be ready by then myself,’ she said; and at
once reflected, ‘so then it was possible to arrange to do as I
wished.’ ‘No, do as you meant to do. Go into the dining
room, I’m coming directly. It’s only to turn out those
things that aren’t wanted,’ she said, putting something
more on the heap of frippery that lay in Annushka’s arms.
Anna Karenina
1607 of 1759
Vronsky was eating his beefsteak when she came into
the dining- room.
‘You wouldn’t believe how distasteful these rooms
have become to me,’ she said, sitting down beside him to
her coffee. ‘There’s nothing more awful than these
chambres garnies. There’s no individuality in them, no
soul. These clocks, and curtains, and, worst of all, the
wallpapers—they’re a nightmare. I think of
Vozdvizhenskoe as the promised land. You’re not sending
the horses off yet?’
‘No, they will come after us. Where are you going to?’
‘I wanted to go to Wilson’s to take some dresses to her.
So it’s really to be tomorrow?’ she said in a cheerful voice;
but suddenly her face changed.
Vronsky’s valet came in to ask him to sign a receipt for
a telegram from Petersburg. There was nothing out of the
way in Vronsky’s getting a telegram, but he said, as though
anxious to conceal something from her, that the receipt
was in his study, and he turned hurriedly to her.
‘By tomorrow, without fail, I will finish it all.’
‘From whom is the telegram?’ she asked, not hearing
him.
‘From Stiva,’ he answered reluctantly.
Anna Karenina
1608 of 1759
‘Why didn’t you show it to me? What secret can there
be between Stiva and me?’
Vronsky called the valet back, and told him to bring
the telegram.
‘I didn’t want to show it to you, because Stiva has such
a passion for telegraphing: why telegraph when nothing is
settled?’
‘About the divorce?’
‘Yes; but he says he has not been able to come at
anything yet. He has promised a decisive answer in a day
or two. But here it is; read it.’
With trembling hands Anna took the telegram, and
read what Vronsky had told her. At the end was added:
‘Little hope; but I will do everything possible and
impossible.’
‘I said yesterday that it’s absolutely nothing to me when
I get, or whether I never get, a divorce,’ she said, flushing
crimson. ‘There was not the slightest necessity to hide it
from me.’ ‘So he may hide and does hide his
correspondence with women from me,’ she thought.
‘Yashvin meant to come this morning with Voytov,’
said Vronsky; ‘I believe he’s won from Pyevtsov all and
more than he can pay, about sixty thousand.’
Anna Karenina
1609 of 1759
‘No,’ she said, irritated by his so obviously showing by
this change of subject that he was irritated, ‘why did you
suppose that this news would affect me so, that you must
even try to hide it? I said I don’t want to consider it, and I
should have liked you to care as little about it as I do.’
‘I care about it because I like definiteness,’ he said.
‘Definiteness is not in the form but the love,’ she said,
more and more irritated, not by his words, but by the tone
of cool composure in which he spoke. ‘What do you want
it for?’
‘My God! love again,’ he thought, frowning.
‘Oh, you know what for; for your sake and your
children’s in the future.’
‘There won’t be children in the future.’
‘That’s a great pity,’ he said.
‘You want it for the children’s sake, but you don’t
think of me?’ she said, quite forgetting or not having heard
that he had said, ‘for your sake and the children’s.’
The question of the possibility of having children had
long been a subject of dispute and irritation to her. His
desire to have children she interpreted as a proof he did
not prize her beauty.
‘Oh, I said: for your sake. Above all for your sake,’ he
repeated, frowning as though in pain, ‘because I am
Anna Karenina
1610 of 1759
certain that the greater part of your irritability comes from
the indefiniteness of the position.’
‘Yes, now he has laid aside all pretense, and all his cold
hatred for me is apparent,’ she thought, not hearing his
words, but watching with terror the cold, cruel judge who
looked mocking her out of his eyes.
‘The cause is not that,’ she said, ‘and, indeed, I don’t
see how the cause of my irritability, as you call it, can be
that I am completely in your power. What indefiniteness is
there in the position? on the contrary..’
‘I am very sorry that you don’t care to understand,’ he
interrupted, obstinately anxious to give utterance to his
thought. ‘The indefiniteness consists in your imagining
that I am free.’
‘On that score you can set your mind quite at rest,’ she
said, and turning away from him, she began drinking her
coffee.
She lifted her cup, with her little finger held apart, and
put it to her lips. After drinking a few sips she glanced at
him, and by his expression, she saw clearly that he was
repelled by her hand, and her gesture, and the sound made
by her lips.
Anna Karenina
1611 of 1759
‘I don’t care in the least what your mother thinks, and
what match she wants to make for you,’ she said, putting
the cup down with a shaking hand.
‘But we are not talking about that.’
‘Yes, that’s just what we are talking about. And let me
tell you that a heartless woman, whether she’s old or not
old, your mother or anyone else, is of no consequence to
me, and I would not consent to know her.’
‘Anna, I beg you not to speak disrespectfully of my
mother.’
‘A woman whose heart does not tell her where her
son’s happiness and honor lie has no heart.’
‘I repeat my request that you will not speak
disrespectfully of my mother, whom I respect,’ he said,
raising his voice and looking sternly at her
She did not answer. Looking intently at him, at his
face, his hands, she recalled all the details of their
reconciliation the previous day, and his passionate caresses.
‘There, just such caresses he has lavished, and will lavish,
and longs to lavish on other women!’ she thought.
‘You don’t love your mother. That’s all talk, and talk,
and talk!’ she said, looking at him with hatred in her eyes.
‘Even if so, you must..’
Anna Karenina
1612 of 1759
‘Must decide, and I have decided,’ she said, and she
would have gone away, but at that moment Yashvin
walked into the room. Anna greeted him and remained.
Why, when there was a tempest in her soul, and she
felt she was standing at a turning point in her life, which
might have fearful consequences—why, at that minute,
she had to keep up appearances before an outsider, who
sooner or later must know it all—she did not know. But at
once quelling the storm within her, she sat down and
began talking to their guest.
‘Well, how are you getting on? Has your debt been
paid you?’ she asked Yashvin.
‘Oh, pretty fair; I fancy I shan’t get it all, but I shall get
a good half. And when are you off?’ said Yashvin, looking
at Vronsky, and unmistakably guessing at a quarrel.
‘The day after tomorrow, I think,’ said Vronsky.
‘You’ve been meaning to go so long, though.’
‘But now it’s quite decided,’ said Anna, looking
Vronsky straight in the face with a look which told him
not to dream of the possibility of reconciliation.
‘Don’t you feel sorry for that unlucky Pyevtsov?’ she
went on, talking to Yashvin.
‘I’ve never asked myself the question, Anna
Arkadyevna, whether I’m sorry for him or not. You see,
Anna Karenina
1613 of 1759
all my fortune’s here’—he touched his breast pocket—
‘and just now I’m a wealthy man. But today I’m going to
the club, and I may come out a beggar. You see, whoever
sits down to play with me—he wants to leave me without
a shirt to my back, and so do I him. And so we fight it
out, and that’s the pleasure of it.’
‘Well, but suppose you were married,’ said Anna, ‘how
would it be for your wife?’
Yashvin laughed.
‘That’s why I’m not married, and never mean to be.’
‘And Helsingfors?’ said Vronsky, entering into the
conversation and glancing at Anna’s smiling face. Meeting
his eyes, Anna’s face instantly took a coldly severe
expression as though she were saying to him: ‘It’s not
forgotten. It’s all the same.’
‘Were you really in love?’ she said to Yashvin.
‘Oh heavens! ever so many times! But you see, some
men can play but only so that they can always lay down
their cards when the hour of a rendezvous comes, while I
can take up love, but only so as not to be late for my cards
in the evening. That’s how I manage things.’
‘No, I didn’t mean that, but the real thing.’ She would
have said Helsingfors, but would not repeat the word used
by Vronsky.
Anna Karenina
1614 of 1759
Voytov, who was buying the horse, came in. Anna got
up and went out of the room.
Before leaving the house, Vronsky went into her room.
She would have pretended to be looking for something on
the table, but ashamed of making a pretense, she looked
straight in his face with cold eyes.
‘What do you want?’ she asked in French.
‘To get the guarantee for Gambetta, I’ve sold him,’ he
said, in a tone which said more clearly than words, ‘I’ve
no time for discussing things, and it would lead to
nothing.’
‘I’m not to blame in any way,’ he thought. ‘If she will
punish herself, tant pis pour elle.’ But as he was going he
fancied that she said something, and his heart suddenly
ached with pity for her.
‘Eh, Anna?’ he queried.
‘I said nothing,’ she answered just as coldly and calmly.
‘Oh, nothing, tant pis then,’ he thought, feeling cold
again, and he turned and went out. As he was going out
he caught a glimpse in the looking glass of her face, white,
with quivering lips. He even wanted to stop and to say
some comforting word to her, but his legs carried him out
of the room before he could think what to say. The whole
of that day he spent away from home, and when he came
Anna Karenina
1615 of 1759
in late in the evening the maid told him that Anna
Arkadyevna had a headache and begged him not to go in
to her.
Anna Karenina
1616 of 1759
Chapter 26
Never before had a day been passed in quarrel. Today
was the first time. And this was not a quarrel. It was the
open acknowledgment of complete coldness. Was it
possible to glance at her as he had glanced when he came
into the room for the guarantee?—to look at her, see her
heart was breaking with despair, and go out without a
word with that face of callous composure? He was not
merely cold to her, he hated her because he loved another
woman—that was clear.
And remembering all the cruel words he had said,
Anna supplied, too, the words that he had unmistakably
wished to say and could have said to her, and she grew
more and more exasperated.
‘I won’t prevent you,’ he might say. ‘You can go
where you like. You were unwilling to be divorced from
your husband, no doubt so that you might go back to
him. Go back to him. If you want money, I’ll give it to
you. How many roubles do you want?’
All the most cruel words that a brutal man could say,
he said to her in her imagination, and she could not
forgive him for them, as though he had actually said them.
Anna Karenina
1617 of 1759
‘But didn’t he only yesterday swear he loved me, he, a
truthful and sincere man? Haven’t I despaired for nothing
many times already?’ she said to herself afterwards.
All that day, except for the visit to Wilson’s, which
occupied two hours, Anna spent in doubts whether
everything were over or whether there were still hope of
reconciliation, whether she should go away at once or see
him once more. She was expecting him the whole day,
and in the evening, as she went to her own room, leaving
a message for him that her head ached, she said to herself,
‘If he comes in spite of what the maid says, it means that
he loves me still. If not, it means that all is over, and then I
will decide what I’m to do!..’
In the evening she heard the rumbling of his carriage
stop at the entrance, his ring, his steps and his conversation
with the servant; he believed what was told him, did not
care to find out more, and went to his own room. So then
everything was over.
And death rose clearly and vividly before her mind as
the sole means of bringing back love for her in his heart,
of punishing him and of gaining the victory in that strife
which the evil spirit in possession of her heart was waging
with him.
Anna Karenina
1618 of 1759
Now nothing mattered: going or not going to
Vozdvizhenskoe, getting or not getting a divorce from her
husband—all that did not matter. The one thing that
mattered was punishing him. When she poured herself out
her usual dose of opium, and thought that she had only to
drink off the whole bottle to die, it seemed to her so
simple and easy, that she began musing with enjoyment on
how he would suffer, and repent and love her memory
when it would be too late. She lay in bed with open eyes,
by the light of a single burned-down candle, gazing at the
carved cornice of the ceiling and at the shadow of the
screen that covered part of it, while she vividly pictured to
herself how he would feel when she would be no more,
when she would be only a memory to him. ‘How could I
say such cruel things to her?’ he would say. ‘How could I
go out of the room without saying anything to her? But
now she is no more. She has gone away from us forever.
She is....’ Suddenly the shadow of the screen wavered,
pounced on the whole cornice, the whole ceiling; other
shadows from the other side swooped to meet it, for an
instant the shadows flitted back, but then with fresh
swiftness they darted forward, wavered, commingled, and
all was darkness. ‘Death!’ she thought. And such horror
came upon her that for a long while she could not realize
Anna Karenina
1619 of 1759
where she was, and for a long while her trembling hands
could not find the matches and light another candle,
instead of the one that had burned down and gone out.
‘No, anything—only to live! Why, I love him! Why, he
loves me! This has been before and will pass,’ she said,
feeling that tears of joy at the return to life were trickling
down her cheeks. And to escape from her panic she went
hurriedly to his room.
He was asleep there, and sleeping soundly. She went up
to him, and holding the light above his face, she gazed a
long while at him. Now when he was asleep, she loved
him so that at the sight of him she could not keep back
tears of tenderness. But she knew that if he waked up he
would look at her with cold eyes, convinced that he was
right, and that before telling him of her love, she would
have to prove to him that he had been wrong in his
treatment of her. Without waking him, she went back,
and after a second dose of opium she fell towards morning
into a heavy, incomplete sleep, during which she never
quite lost consciousness.
In the morning she was waked by a horrible nightmare,
which had recurred several times in her dreams, even
before her connection with Vronsky. A little old man with
unkempt beard was doing something bent down over
Anna Karenina
1620 of 1759
some iron, muttering meaningless French words, and she,
as she always did in this nightmare (it was what made the
horror of it), felt that this peasant was taking no notice of
her, but was doing something horrible with the iron—
over her. And she waked up in a cold sweat.
When she got up, the previous day came back to her as
though veiled in mist.
‘There was a quarrel. Just what has happened several
times. I said I had a headache, and he did not come in to
see me. Tomorrow we’re going away; I must see him and
get ready for the journey,’ she said to herself. And learning
that he was in his study, she went down to him. As she
passed through the drawing room she heard a carriage stop
at the entrance, and looking out of the window she saw
the carriage, from which a young girl in a lilac hat was
leaning out giving some direction to the footman ringing
the bell. After a parley in the hall, someone came upstairs,
and Vronsky’s steps could be heard passing the drawing
room. He went rapidly downstairs. Anna went again to
the window. She saw him come out onto the steps
without his hat and go up to the carriage. The young girl
in the lilac hat handed him a parcel. Vronsky, smiling, said
something to her. The carriage drove away, he ran rapidly
upstairs again.
Anna Karenina
1621 of 1759
The mists that had shrouded everything in her soul
parted suddenly. The feelings of yesterday pierced the sick
heart with a fresh pang. She could not understand now
how she could have lowered herself by spending a whole
day with him in his house. she went into his room to
announce her determination.
‘That was Madame Sorokina and her daughter. They
came and brought me the money and the deeds from
maman. I couldn’t get them yesterday. How is your head,
better?’ he said quietly, not wishing to see and to
understand the gloomy and solemn expression of her face.
She looked silently, intently at him, standing in the
middle of the room. He glanced at her, frowned for a
moment, and went on reading a letter. She turned, and
went deliberately out of the room. He still might have
turned her back, but she had reached the door, he was still
silent, and the only sound audible was the rustling of the
note paper as he turned it.
‘Oh, by the way,’ he said at the very moment she was
in the doorway, ‘we’re going tomorrow for certain, aren’t
we?’
‘You, but not I,’ she said, turning round to him.
‘Anna, we can’t go on like this..’
‘You, but not I,’ she repeated.
Anna Karenina
1622 of 1759
‘This is getting unbearable!’
‘You...you will be sorry for this,’ she said, and went
out.
Frightened by the desperate expression with which
these words were uttered, he jumped up and would have
run after her, but on second thoughts he sat down and
scowled, setting his teeth. This vulgar—as he thought it—
threat of something vague exasperated him. ‘I’ve tried
everything,’ he thought; ‘the only thing left is not to pay
attention,’ and he began to get ready to drive into town,
and again to his mother’s to get her signature to the deeds.
She heard the sound of his steps about the study and
the dining room. At the drawing room he stood still. But
he did not turn in to see her, he merely gave an order that
the horse should be given to Voytov if he came while he
was away. Then she heard the carriage brought round, the
door opened, and he came out again. But he went back
into the porch again, and someone was running upstairs. It
was the valet running up for his gloves that had been
forgotten. She went to the window and saw him take the
gloves without looking, and touching the coachman on
the back he said something to him. Then without looking
up at the window he settled himself in his usual attitude in
Anna Karenina
1623 of 1759
the carriage, with his legs crossed, and drawing on his
gloves he vanished round the corner.
Anna Karenina
1624 of 1759
Chapter 27
‘He has gone! It is over!’ Anna said to herself, standing
at the window; and in answer to this statement the
impression of the darkness when the candle had flickered
out, and of her fearful dream mingling into one, filled her
heart with cold terror.
‘No, that cannot be!’ she cried, and crossing the room
she rang the bell. She was so afraid now of being alone,
that without waiting for the servant to come in, she went
out to meet him.
‘Iquire where the count has gone,’ she said. The
servant answered that the count had gone to the stable.
‘His honor left word that if you cared to drive out, the
carriage would be back immediately.’
‘Very good. Wait a minute. I’ll write a note at once.
Send Mihail with the note to the stables. Make haste.’
She sat down and wrote:
‘I was wrong. Come back home; I must explain. For
God’s sake come! I’m afraid.’
She sealed it up and gave it to the servant.
She was afraid of being left alone now; she followed the
servant out of the room, and went to the nursery.
Anna Karenina
1625 of 1759
‘Why, this isn’t it, this isn’t he! Where are his blue
eyes, his sweet, shy smile?’ was her first thought when she
saw her chubby rosy little girl with her black, curly hair
instead of Seryozha, whom in the tangle of her ideas she
had expected to see in the nursery. The little girl sitting at
the table was obstinately and violently battering on it with
a cork, and staring aimlessly at her mother with her pitchblack eyes. Answering the English nurse that she was quite
well, and that she was going to the country tomorrow,
Anna sat down by the little girl and began spinning the
cork to show her. But the child’s loud, ringing laugh, and
the motion of her eyebrows, recalled Vronsky so vividly
that she got up hurriedly, restraining her sobs, and went
away. ‘Can it be all over? No, it cannot be!’ she thought.
‘He will come back. But how can he explain that smile,
that excitement after he had been talking to her? But even
if he doesn’t explain, I will believe. If I don’t believe,
there’s only one thing left for me, and I can’t.’
She looked at her watch. Twenty minutes had passed.
‘By now he has received the note and is coming back. Not
long, ten minutes more.... But what if he doesn’t come?
No, that cannot be. He mustn’t see me with tear-stained
eyes. I’ll go and wash. Yes, yes; did I do my hair or not?’
she asked herself. And she could not remember. She felt
Anna Karenina
1626 of 1759
her head with her hand. ‘Yes, my hair has been done, but
when I did it I can’t in the least remember.’ She could not
believe the evidence of her hand, and went up to the pier
glass to see whether she really had done her hair. She
certainly had, but she could not think when she had done
it. ‘Who’s that?’ she thought, looking in the looking glass
at the swollen face with strangely glittering eyes, that
looked in a scared way at her. ‘Why, it’s I!’ she suddenly
understood, and looking round, she seemed all at once to
feel his kisses on her, and twitched her shoulders,
shuddering. Then she lifted her hand to her lips and kissed
it.
‘What is it? Why, I’m going out of my mind!’ and she
went into her bedroom, where Annushka was tidying the
room.
‘Annushka,’ she said, coming to a standstill before her,
and she stared at the maid, not knowing what to say to
her.
‘You meant to go and see Darya Alexandrovna,’ said
the girl, as though she understood.
‘Darya Alexandrovna? Yes, I’ll go.’
‘Fifteen minutes there, fifteen minutes back. He’s
coming, he’ll be here soon.’ She took out her watch and
looked at it. ‘But how could he go away, leaving me in
Anna Karenina
1627 of 1759
such a state? How can he live, without making it up with
me?’ She went to the window and began looking into the
street. Judging by the time, he might be back now. But
her calculations might be wrong, and she began once
more to recall when he had started and to count the
minutes.
At the moment when she had moved away to the big
clock to compare it with her watch, someone drove up.
Glancing out of the window, she saw his carriage. But no
one came upstairs, and voices could be heard below. It
was the messenger who had come back in the carriage.
She went down to him.
‘We didn’t catch the count. The count had driven off
on the lower city road.’
‘What do you say? What!...’ she said to the rosy, goodhumored Mihail, as he handed her back her note.
‘Why, then, he has never received it!’ she thought.
‘Go with this note to Countess Vronskaya’s place, you
know? and bring an answer back immediately,’ she said to
the messenger.
‘And I, what am I going to do?’ she thought. ‘Yes, I’m
going to Dolly’s, that’s true or else I shall go out of my
mind. Yes, and I can telegraph, too.’ And she wrote a
telegram. ‘I absolutely must talk to you; come at once.’
Anna Karenina
1628 of 1759
After sending off the telegram, she went to dress. When
she was dressed and in her hat, she glanced again into the
eyes of the plump, comfortable-looking Annushka. There
was unmistakable sympathy in those good-natured little
gray eyes.
‘Annushka, dear, what am I to do?’ said Anna, sobbing
and sinking helplessly into a chair.
‘Why fret yourself so, Anna Arkadyevna? Why, there’s
nothing out of the way. You drive out a little, and it’ll
cheer you up,’ said the maid.
‘Yes, I’m going,’ said Anna, rousing herself and getting
up. ‘And if there’s a telegram while I’m away, send it on
to Darya Alexandrovna’s...but no, I shall be back myself.’
‘Yes, I mustn’t think, I must do something, drive
somewhere, and most of all, get out of this house,’ she
said, feeling with terror the strange turmoil going on in
her own heart, and she made haste to go out and get into
the carriage.
‘Where to?’ asked Pyotr before getting onto the bow
‘To Znamenka, the Oblonskys’.’
Anna Karenina
1629 of 1759
Chapter 28
It was bright and sunny. A fine rain had been falling all
the morning, and now it had not long cleared up. The
iron roofs, the flags of the roads, the flints of the
pavements, the wheels and leather, the brass and the
tinplate of the carriages—all glistened brightly in the May
sunshine. It was three o’clock, and the very liveliest time
in the streets.
As she sat in a corner of the comfortable carriage, that
hardly swayed on its supple springs, while the grays trotted
swiftly, in the midst of the unceasing rattle of wheels and
the changing impressions in the pure air, Anna ran over
the events of the last days, and she saw her position quite
differently from how it had seemed at home. Now the
thought of death seemed no longer so terrible and so clear
to her, and death itself no longer seemed so inevitable.
Now she blamed herself for the humiliation to which she
had lowered herself. ‘I entreat him to forgive me. I have
given in to him. I have owned myself in fault. What for?
Can’t I live without him?’ And leaving unanswered the
question how she was going to live without him, she fell
to reading the signs on the shops. ‘Office and warehouse.
Anna Karenina
1630 of 1759
Dental surgeon. Yes, I’ll tell Dolly all about it. She doesn’t
like Vronsky. I shall be sick and ashamed, but I’ll tell her.
She loves me, and I’ll follow her advice. I won’t give in to
him; I won’t let him train me as he pleases. Filippov, bun
shop. They say they send their dough to Petersburg. The
Moscow water is so good for it. Ah, the springs at
Mitishtchen, and the pancakes!’
And she remembered how, long, long ago, when she
was a girl of seventeen, she had gone with her aunt to
Troitsa. ‘Riding, too. Was that really me, with red hands?
How much that seemed to me then splendid and out of
reach has become worthless, while what I had then has
gone out of my reach forever! Could I ever have believed
then that I could come to such humiliation? How
conceited and self-satisfied he will be when he gets my
note! But I will show him.... How horrid that paint smells!
Why is it they’re always painting and building? Modes et
robes,’ she read. A man bowed to her. It was Annushka’s
husband. ‘Our parasites"; she remembered how Vronsky
had said that. ‘Our? Why our? What’s so awful is that one
can’t tear up the past by its roots. One can’t tear it out, but
one can hide one’s memory of it. And I’ll hide it.’ And
then she thought of her past with Alexey Alexandrovitch,
of how she had blotted the memory of it out of her life.
Anna Karenina
1631 of 1759
‘Dolly will think I’m leaving my second husband, and so I
certainly must be in the wrong. As if I cared to be right! I
can’t help it!’ she said, and she wanted to cry. But at once
she fell to wondering what those two girls could be
smiling about. ‘Love, most likely. They don’t know how
dreary it is, how low.... The boulevard and the children.
Three boys running, playing at horses. Seryozha! And I’m
losing everything and not getting him back. Yes, I’m
losing everything, if he doesn’t return. Perhaps he was late
for the train and has come back by now. Longing for
humiliation again!’ she said to herself. ‘No, I’ll go to
Dolly, and say straight out to her, I’m unhappy, I deserve
this, I’m to blame, but still I’m unhappy, help me. These
horses, this carriage—how loathsome I am to myself in
this carriage—all his; but I won’t see them again.’
Thinking over the words in which she would tell
Dolly, and mentally working her heart up to great
bitterness, Anna went upstairs.
‘Is there anyone with her?’ she asked in the hall.
‘Katerina Alexandrovna Levin,’ answered the footman.
‘Kitty! Kitty, whom Vronsky was in love with!’
thought Anna, ‘the girl he thinks of with love. He’s sorry
he didn’t marry her. But me he thinks of with hatred, and
is sorry he had anything to do with me.’
Anna Karenina
1632 of 1759
The sisters were having a consultation about nursing
when Anna called. Dolly went down alone to see the
visitor who had interrupted their conversation.
‘Well, so you’ve not gone away yet? I meant to have
come to you,’ she said; ‘I had a letter from Stiva today.’
‘We had a telegram too,’ answered Anna, looking
round for Kitty.
‘He writes that he can’t make out quite what Alexey
Alexandrovitch wants, but he won’t go away without a
decisive answer.’
‘I thought you had someone with you. Can I see the
letter?’
‘Yes; Kitty,’ said Dolly, embarrassed. ‘She stayed in the
nursery. She has been very ill.’
‘So I heard. May I see the letter?’
‘I’ll get it directly. But he doesn’t refuse; on the
contrary, Stiva has hopes,’ said Dolly, stopping in the
doorway.
‘I haven’t, and indeed I don’t wish it,’ said Anna.
‘What’s this? Does Kitty consider it degrading to meet
me?’ thought Anna when she was alone. ‘Perhaps she’s
right, too. But it’s not for her, the girl who was in love
with Vronsky, it’s not for her to show me that, even if it is
true. I know that in my position I can’t be received by any
Anna Karenina
1633 of 1759
decent woman. I knew that from the first moment I
sacrificed everything to him. And this is my reward! Oh,
how I hate him! And what did I come here for? I’m worse
here, more miserable.’ She heard from the next room the
sisters’ voices in consultation. ‘And what am I going to say
to Dolly now? Amuse Kitty by the sight of my
wretchedness, submit to her patronizing? No; and besides,
Dolly wouldn’t understand. And it would be no good my
telling her. It would only be interesting to see Kitty, to
show her how I despise everyone and everything, how
nothing matters to me now.’
Dolly came in with the letter. Anna read it and handed
it back in silence.
‘I knew all that,’ she said, ‘and it doesn’t interest me in
the least.’
‘Oh, why so? On the contrary, I have hopes,’ said
Dolly, looking inquisitively at Anna. She had never seen
her in such a strangely irritable condition. ‘When are you
going away?’ she asked.
Anna, half-closing her eyes, looked straight before her
and did not answer.
‘Why does Kitty shrink from me?’ she said, looking at
the door and flushing red.
Anna Karenina
1634 of 1759
‘Oh, what nonsense! She’s nursing, and things aren’t
going right with her, and I’ve been advising her.... She’s
delighted. She’ll be here in a minute,’ said Dolly
awkwardly, not clever at lying. ‘Yes, here she is.’
Hearing that Anna had called, Kitty had wanted not to
appear, but Dolly persuaded her. Rallying her forces, Kitty
went in, walked up to her, blushing, and shook hands.
‘I am so glad to see you,’ she said with a trembling
voice.
Kitty had been thrown into confusion by the inward
conflict between her antagonism to this bad woman and
her desire to be nice to her. But as soon as she saw Anna’s
lovely and attractive face, all feeling of antagonism
disappeared.
‘I should not have been surprised if you had not cared
to meet me. I’m used to everything. You have been ill?
Yes, you are changed,’ said Anna.
Kitty felt that Anna was looking at her with hostile
eyes. She ascribed this hostility to the awkward position in
which Anna, who had once patronized her, must feel with
her now, and she felt sorry for her.
They talked of Kitty’s illness, of the baby, of Stiva, but
it was obvious that nothing interested Anna.
‘I came to say good-bye to you,’ she said, getting up.
Anna Karenina
1635 of 1759
‘Oh, when are you going?’
But again not answering, Anna turned to Kitty.
‘Yes, I am very glad to have seen you,’ she said with a
smile. ‘I have heard so much of you from everyone, even
from your husband. He came to see me, and I liked him
exceedingly,’ she said, unmistakably with malicious intent.
‘Where is he?’
‘He has gone back to the country,’ said Kitty, blushing.
‘Remember me to him, be sure you do.’
‘I’ll be sure to!’ Kitty said naively, looking
compassionately into her eyes.
‘So good-bye, Dolly.’ And kissing Dolly and shaking
hands with Kitty, Anna went out hurriedly.
‘She’s just the same and just as charming! She’s very
lovely!’ said Kitty, when she was alone with her sister.
‘But there’s something piteous about her. Awfully
piteous!’
‘Yes, there’s something unusual about her today,’ said
Dolly. ‘When I went with her into the hall, I fancied she
was almost crying.’
Anna Karenina
1636 of 1759
Chapter 29
Anna got into the carriage again in an even worse
frame of mind than when she set out from home. To her
previous tortures was added now that sense of
mortification and of being an outcast which she had felt so
distinctly on meeting Kitty.
‘Where to? Home?’ asked Pyotr.
‘Yes, home,’ she said, not even thinking now where
she was going.
‘How they looked at me as something dreadful,
incomprehensible, and curious! What can he be telling the
other with such warmth?’ she thought, staring at two men
who walked by. ‘Can one ever tell anyone what one is
feeling? I meant to tell Dolly, and it’s a good thing I didn’t
tell her. How pleased she would have been at my misery!
She would have concealed it, but her chief feeling would
have been delight at my being punished for the happiness
she envied me for. Kitty, she would have been even more
pleased. How I can see through her! She knows I was
more than usually sweet to her husband. And she’s jealous
and hates me. And she despises me. In her eyes I’m an
immoral woman. If I were an immoral woman I could
Anna Karenina
1637 of 1759
have made her husband fall in love with me ...if I’d cared
to. And, indeed, I did care to. There’s someone who’s
pleased with himself,’ she thought, as she saw a fat,
rubicund gentleman coming towards her. He took her for
an acquaintance, and lifted his glossy hat above his bald,
glossy head, and then perceived his mistake. ‘He thought
he knew me. Well, he knows me as well as anyone in the
world knows me. I don’t know myself. I know my
appetites, as the French say. They want that dirty ice
cream, that they do know for certain,’ she thought,
looking at two boys stopping an ice cream seller, who
took a barrel off his head and began wiping his perspiring
face with a towel. ‘We all want what is sweet and nice. If
not sweetmeats, then a dirty ice. And Kitty’s the same—if
not Vronsky, then Levin. And she envies me, and hates
me. And we all hate each other. I Kitty, Kitty me. Yes,
that’s the truth. ‘Tiutkin, coiffeur.’ Je me fais coiffer par
Tiutkin.... I’ll tell him that when he comes,’ she thought
and smiled. But the same instant she remembered that she
had no one now to tell anything amusing to. ‘And there’s
nothing amusing, nothing mirthful, really. It’s all hateful.
They’re singing for vespers, and how carefully that
merchant crosses himself! as if he were afraid of missing
something. Why these churches and this singing and this
Anna Karenina
1638 of 1759
humbug? Simply to conceal that we all hate each other
like these cab drivers who are abusing each other so
angrily. Yashvin says, ‘He wants to strip me of my shirt,
and I him of his.’ Yes, that’s the truth!’
She was plunged in these thoughts, which so engrossed
her that she left off thinking of her own position, when
the carriage drew up at the steps of her house. It was only
when she saw the porter running out to meet her that she
remembered she had sent the note and the telegram
‘Is there an answer?’ she inquired.
‘I’ll see this minute,’ answered the porter, and glancing
into his room, he took out and gave her the thin square
envelope of a telegram. ‘I can’t come before ten
o’clock.—Vronsky,’ she read.
‘And hasn’t the messenger come back?’
‘No,’ answered the porter.
‘Then, since it’s so, I know what I must do,’ she said,
and feeling a vague fury and craving for revenge rising up
within her, she ran upstairs. ‘I’ll go to him myself. Before
going away forever, I’ll tell him all. Never have I hated
anyone as I hate that man!’ she thought. Seeing his hat on
the rack, she shuddered with aversion. She did not
consider that his telegram was an answer to her telegram
and that he had not yet received her note. She pictured
Anna Karenina
1639 of 1759
him to herself as talking calmly to his mother and Princess
Sorokina and rejoicing at her sufferings. ‘Yes, I must go
quickly,’ she said, not knowing yet where she was going.
She longed to get away as quickly as possible from the
feelings she had gone through in that awful house. The
servants, the walls, the things in that house—all aroused
repulsion and hatred in her and lay like a weight upon her.
‘Yes, I must go to the railway station, and if he’s not
there, then go there and catch him.’ Anna looked at the
railway timetable in the newspapers. An evening train
went at two minutes past eight. ‘Yes, I shall be in time.’
She gave orders for the other horses to be put in the
carriage, and packed in a traveling-bag the things needed
for a few days. She knew she would never come back here
again.
Among the plans that came into her head she vaguely
determined that after what would happen at the station or
at the countess’s house, she would go as far as the first
town on the Nizhni road and stop there.
Dinner was on the table; she went up, but the smell of
the bread and cheese was enough to make her feel that all
food was disgusting. She ordered the carriage and went
out. The house threw a shadow now right across the
street, but it was a bright evening and still warm in the
Anna Karenina
1640 of 1759
sunshine. Annushka, who came down with her things, and
Pyotr, who put the things in the carriage, and the
coachman, evidently out of humor, were all hateful to her,
and irritated her by their words and actions.
‘I don’t want you, Pyotr.’
‘But how about the ticket?’
‘Well, as you like, it doesn’t matter,’ she said crossly.
Pyotr jumped on the box, and putting his arms akimbo,
told the coachman to drive to the booking-office.
Anna Karenina
1641 of 1759
Chapter 30
‘Here it is again! Again I understand it all!’ Anna said to
herself, as soon as the carriage had started and swaying
lightly, rumbled over the tiny cobbles of the paved road,
and again one impression followed rapidly upon another.
‘Yes; what was the last thing I thought of so clearly?’
she tried to recall it. ‘‘Tiutkin, coiffeur?’—no, not that.
Yes, of what Yashvin says, the struggle for existence and
hatred is the one thing that holds men together. No, it’s a
useless journey you’re making,’ she said, mentally
addressing a party in a coach and four, evidently going for
an excursion into the country. ‘And the dog you’re taking
with you will be no help to you. You can’t get away from
yourselves.’ Turning her eyes in the direction Pyotr had
turned to look, she saw a factory hand almost dead drunk,
with hanging head, being led away by a policeman.
‘Come, he’s found a quicker way,’ she thought. ‘Count
Vronsky and I did not find that happiness either, though
we expected so much from it.’ And now for the first time
Anna turned that glaring light in which she was seeing
everything on to her relations with him, which she had
hitherto avoided thinking about. ‘What was it he sought
Anna Karenina
1642 of 1759
in me? Not love so much as the satisfaction of vanity.’ She
remembered his words, the expression of his face, that
recalled an abject setter-dog, in the early days of their
connection. And everything now confirmed this. ‘Yes,
there was the triumph of success in him. Of course there
was love too, but the chief element was the pride of
success. He boasted of me. Now that’s over. There’s
nothing to be proud of. Not to be proud of, but to be
ashamed of. He has taken from me all he could, and now I
am no use to him. He is weary of me and is trying not to
be dishonorable in his behavior to me. He let that out
yesterday—he wants divorce and marriage so as to burn
his ships. He loves me, but how? The zest is gone, as the
English say. That fellow wants everyone to admire him
and is very much pleased with himself,’ she thought,
looking at a red-faced clerk, riding on a riding school
horse. ‘Yes, there’s not the same flavor about me for him
now. If I go away from him, at the bottom of his heart he
will be glad.’
This was not mere supposition, she saw it distinctly in
the piercing light, which revealed to her now the meaning
of life and human relations.
‘My love keeps growing more passionate and egoistic,
while his is waning and waning, and that’s why we’re
Anna Karenina
1643 of 1759
drifting apart.’ She went on musing. ‘And there’s no help
for it. He is everything for me, and I want him more and
more to give himself up to me entirely. And he wants
more and more to get away from me. We walked to meet
each other up to the time of our love, and then we have
been irresistibly drifting in different directions. And there’s
no altering that. He tells me I’m insanely jealous, and I
have told myself that I am insanely jealous; but it’s not
true. I’m not jealous, but I’m unsatisfied. But...’ she
opened her lips, and shifted her place in the carriage in the
excitement, aroused by the thought that suddenly struck
her. ‘If I could be anything but a mistress, passionately
caring for nothing but his caresses; but I can’t and I don’t
care to be anything else. And by that desire I rouse
aversion in him, and he rouses fury in me, and it cannot
be different. Don’t I know that he wouldn’t deceive me,
that he has no schemes about Princess Sorokina, that he’s
not in love with Kitty, that he won’t desert me! I know all
that, but it makes it no better for me. If without loving
me, from DUTY he’ll be good and kind to me, without
what I want, that’s a thousand times worse than
unkindness! That’s—hell! And that’s just how it is. For a
long while now he hasn’t loved me. And where love ends,
hate begins. I don’t know these streets at all. Hills it seems,
Anna Karenina
1644 of 1759
and still houses, and houses .... And in the houses always
people and people.... How many of them, no end, and all
hating each other! Come, let me try and think what I
want, to make me happy. Well? Suppose I am divorced,
and Alexey Alexandrovitch lets me have Seryozha, and I
marry Vronsky.’ Thinking of Alexey Alexandrovitch, she
at once pictured him with extraordinary vividness as
though he were alive before her, with his mild, lifeless,
dull eyes, the blue veins in his white hands, his intonations
and the cracking of his fingers, and remembering the
feeling which had existed between them, and which was
also called love, she shuddered with loathing. ‘Well, I’m
divorced, and become Vronsky’s wife. Well, will Kitty
cease looking at me as she looked at me today? No. And
will Seryozha leave off asking and wondering about my
two husbands? And is there any new feeling I can awaken
between Vronsky and me? Is there possible, if not
happiness, some sort of ease from misery? No, no!’ she
answered now without the slightest hesitation.
‘Impossible! We are drawn apart by life, and I make his
unhappiness, and he mine, and there’s no altering him or
me. Every attempt has been made, the screw has come
unscrewed. Oh, a beggar woman with a baby. She thinks
I’m sorry for her. Aren’t we all flung into the world only
Anna Karenina
1645 of 1759
to hate each other, and so to torture ourselves and each
other? Schoolboys coming—laughing Seryozha?’ she
thought. ‘I thought, too, that I loved him, and used to be
touched by my own tenderness. But I have lived without
him, I gave him up for another love, and did not regret
the exchange till that love was satisfied.’ And with loathing
she thought of what she meant by that love. And the
clearness with which she saw life now, her own and all
men’s, was a pleasure to her. ‘It’s so with me and Pyotr,
and the coachman, Fyodor, and that merchant, and all the
people living along the Volga, where those placards invite
one to go, and everywhere and always,’ she thought when
she had driven under the low-pitched roof of the
Nizhigorod station, and the porters ran to meet her.
‘A ticket to Obiralovka?’ said Pyotr.
She had utterly forgotten where and why she was
going, and only by a great effort she understood the
question.
‘Yes,’ she said, handing him her purse, and taking a
little red bag in her hand, she got out of the carriage.
Making her way through the crowd to the first-class
waiting-room, she gradually recollected all the details of
her position, and the plans between which she was
hesitating. And again at the old sore places, hope and then
Anna Karenina
1646 of 1759
despair poisoned the wounds of her tortured, fearfully
throbbing heart. As she sat on the star-shaped sofa waiting
for the train, she gazed with aversion at the people coming
and going (they were all hateful to her), and thought how
she would arrive at the station, would write him a note,
and what she would write to him, and how he was at this
moment complaining to his mother of his position, not
understanding her sufferings, and how she would go into
the room, and what she would say to him. Then she
thought that life might still be happy, and how miserably
she loved and hated him, and how fearfully her heart was
beating.
Anna Karenina
1647 of 1759
Chapter 31
A bell rang, some young men, ugly and impudent, and
at the same time careful of the impression they were
making, hurried by. Pyotr, too, crossed the room in his
livery and top-boots, with his dull, animal face, and came
up to her to take her to the train. Some noisy men were
quiet as she passed them on the platform, and one
whispered something about her to another— something
vile, no doubt. She stepped up on the high step, and sat
down in a carriage by herself on a dirty seat that had been
white. Her bag lay beside her, shaken up and down by the
springiness of the seat. With a foolish smile Pyotr raised his
hat, with its colored band, at the window, in token of
farewell; an impudent conductor slammed the door and
the latch. A grotesque-looking lady wearing a bustle (Anna
mentally undressed the woman, and was appalled at her
hideousness), and a little girl laughing affectedly ran down
the platform.
‘Katerina Andreevna, she’s got them all, ma tante!’
cried the girl.
‘Even the child’s hideous and affected,’ thought Anna.
To avoid seeing anyone, she got up quickly and seated
Anna Karenina
1648 of 1759
herself at the opposite window of the empty carriage. A
misshapen-looking peasant covered with dirt, in a cap
from which his tangled hair stuck out all round, passed by
that window, stooping down to the carriage wheels.
‘There’s something familiar about that hideous peasant,’
thought Anna. And remembering her dream, she moved
away to the opposite door, shaking with terror. The
conductor opened the door and let in a man and his wife.
‘Do you wish to get out?’
Anna made no answer. The conductor and her two
fellow-passengers did not notice under her veil her panicstricken face. She went back to her corner and sat down.
The couple seated themselves on the opposite side, and
intently but surreptitiously scrutinized her clothes. Both
husband and wife seemed repulsive to Anna. The husband
asked, would she allow him to smoke, obviously not with
a view to smoking but to getting into conversation with
her. Receiving her assent, he said to his wife in French
something about caring less to smoke than to talk. They
made inane and affected remarks to one another, entirely
for her benefit. Anna saw clearly that they were sick of
each other, and hated each other. And no one could have
helped hating such miserable monstrosities.
Anna Karenina
1649 of 1759
A second bell sounded, and was followed by moving of
luggage, noise, shouting and laughter. It was so clear to
Anna that there was nothing for anyone to be glad of, that
this laughter irritated her agonizingly, and she would have
liked to stop up her ears not to hear it. At last the third
bell rang, there was a whistle and a hiss of steam, and a
clank of chains, and the man in her carriage crossed
himself. ‘It would be interesting to ask him what meaning
he attaches to that,’ thought Anna, looking angrily at him.
She looked past the lady out of the window at the people
who seemed whirling by as they ran beside the train or
stood on the platform. The train, jerking at regular
intervals at the junctions of the rails, rolled by the
platform, past a stone wall, a signal-box, past other trains;
the wheels, moving more smoothly and evenly, resounded
with a slight clang on the rails. The window was lighted
up by the bright evening sun, and a slight breeze fluttered
the curtain. Anna forgot her fellow passengers, and to the
light swaying of the train she fell to thinking again, as she
breathed the fresh air.
‘Yes, what did I stop at? That I couldn’t conceive a
position in which life would not be a misery, that we are
all created to be miserable, and that we all know it, and all
Anna Karenina
1650 of 1759
invent means of deceiving each other. And when one sees
the truth, what is one to do?’
‘That’s what reason is given man for, to escape from
what worries him,’ said the lady in French, lisping
affectedly, and obviously pleased with her phrase.
The words seemed an answer to Anna’s thoughts.
‘To escape from what worries him,’ repeated Anna.
And glancing at the red-checked husband and the thin
wife, she saw that the sickly wife considered herself
misunderstood, and the husband deceived her and
encouraged her in that idea of herself. Anna seemed to see
all their history and all the crannies of their souls, as it
were turning a light upon them. But there was nothing
interesting in them, and she pursued her thought.
‘Yes, I’m very much worried, and that’s what reason
was given me for, to escape; so then one must escape: why
not put out the light when there’s nothing more to look
at, when it’s sickening to look at it all? But how? Why did
the conductor run along the footboard, why are they
shrieking, those young men in that train? why are they
talking, why are they laughing? It’s all falsehood, all lying,
all humbug, all cruelty!..’
When the train came into the station, Anna got out
into the crowd of passengers, and moving apart from them
Anna Karenina
1651 of 1759
as if they were lepers, she stood on the platform, trying to
think what she had come here for, and what she meant to
do. Everything that had seemed to her possible before was
now so difficult to consider, especially in this noisy crowd
of hideous people who would not leave her alone. One
moment porters ran up to her proffering their services,
then young men, clacking their heels on the planks of the
platform and talking loudly, stared at her; people meeting
her dodged past on the wrong side. Remembering that she
had meant to go on further if there were no answer, she
stopped a porter and asked if her coachman were not here
with a note from Count Vronsky.
‘Count Vronsky? They sent up here from the Vronskys
just this minute, to meet Princess Sorokina and her
daughter. And what is the coachman like?’
Just as she was talking to the porter, the coachman
Mihail, red and cheerful in his smart blue coat and chain,
evidently proud of having so successfully performed his
commission, came up to her and gave her a letter. She
broke it open, and her heart ached before she had read it.
‘I am very sorry your note did not reach me. I will be
home at ten,’ Vronsky had written carelessly....
‘Yes, that’s what I expected!’ she said to herself with an
evil smile.
Anna Karenina
1652 of 1759
‘Very good, you can go home then,’ she said softly,
addressing Mihail. She spoke softly because the rapidity of
her heart’s beating hindered her breathing. ‘No, I won’t
let you make me miserable,’ she thought menacingly,
addressing not him, not herself, but the power that made
her suffer, and she walked along the platform.
Two maidservants walking along the platform turned
their heads, staring at her and making some remarks about
her dress. ‘Real,’ they said of the lace she was wearing.
The young men would not leave her in peace. Again they
passed by, peering into her face, and with a laugh shouting
something in an unnatural voice. The station-master
coming up asked her whether she was going by train. A
boy selling kvas never took his eyes off her. ‘My God!
where am I to go?’ she thought, going farther and farther
along the platform. At the end she stopped. Some ladies
and children, who had come to meet a gentleman in
spectacles, paused in their loud laughter and talking, and
stared at her as she reached them. She quickened her pace
and walked away from them to the edge of the platform.
A luggage train was coming in. The platform began to
sway, and she fancied she was in the train again.
And all at once she thought of the man crushed by the
train the day she had first met Vronsky, and she knew
Anna Karenina
1653 of 1759
what she had to do. With a rapid, light step she went
down the steps that led from the tank to the rails and
stopped quite near the approaching train.
She looked at the lower part of the carriages, at the
screws and chains and the tall cast-iron wheel of the first
carriage slowly moving up, and trying to measure the
middle between the front and back wheels, and the very
minute when that middle point would be opposite her.
‘There,’ she said to herself, looking into the shadow of
the carriage, at the sand and coal dust which covered the
sleepers— ‘there, in the very middle, and I will punish
him and escape from everyone and from myself.’
She tried to fling herself below the wheels of the first
carriage as it reached her; but the red bag which she tried
to drop out of her hand delayed her, and she was too late;
she missed the moment. She had to wait for the next
carriage. A feeling such as she had known when about to
take the first plunge in bathing came upon her, and she
crossed herself. That familiar gesture brought back into her
soul a whole series of girlish and childish memories, and
suddenly the darkness that had covered everything for her
was torn apart, and life rose up before her for an instant
with all its bright past joys. But she did not take her eyes
from the wheels of the second carriage. And exactly at the
Anna Karenina
1654 of 1759
moment when the space between the wheels came
opposite her, she dropped the red bag, and drawing her
head back into her shoulders, fell on her hands under the
carriage, and lightly, as though she would rise again at
once, dropped on to her knees. And at the same instant
she was terror-stricken at what she was doing. ‘Where am
I? What am I doing? What for?’ she tried to get up, to
drop backwards; but something huge and merciless struck
her on the head and rolled her on her back. ‘Lord, forgive
me all!’ she said, feeling it impossible to struggle. A peasant
muttering something was working at the iron above her.
And the light by which she had read the book filled with
troubles, falsehoods, sorrow, and evil, flared up more
brightly than ever before, lighted up for her all that had
been in darkness, flickered, began to grow dim, and was
quenched forever.
Anna Karenina
1655 of 1759
PART EIGHT
Anna Karenina
1656 of 1759
Chapter 1
Almost two months had passed. The hot summer was
half over, but Sergey Ivanovitch was only just preparing to
leave Moscow.
Sergey Ivanovitch’s life had not been uneventful during
this time. A year ago he had finished his book, the fruit of
six years’ labor, ‘Sketch of a Survey of the Principles and
Forms of Government in Europe and Russia.’ Several
sections of this book and its introduction had appeared in
periodical publications, and other parts had been read by
Sergey Ivanovitch to persons of his circle, so that the
leading ideas of the work could not be completely novel
to the public. But still Sergey Ivanovitch had expected that
on its appearance his book would be sure to make a
serious impression on society, and if it did not cause a
revolution in social science it would, at any rate, make a
great stir in the scientific world.
After the most conscientious revision the book had last
year been published, and had been distributed among the
booksellers.
Though he asked no one about it, reluctantly and with
feigned indifference answered his friends’ inquiries as to
how the book was going, and did not even inquire of the
Anna Karenina
1657 of 1759
booksellers how the book was selling, Sergey Ivanovitch
was all on the alert, with strained attention, watching for
the first impression his book would make in the world and
in literature.
But a week passed, a second, a third, and in society no
impression whatever could be detected. His friends who
were specialists and savants, occasionally—unmistakably
from politeness—alluded to it. The rest of his
acquaintances, not interested in a book on a learned
subject, did not talk of it at all. And society generally—just
now especially absorbed in other things—was absolutely
indifferent. In the press, too, for a whole month there was
not a word about his book.
Sergey Ivanovitch had calculated to a nicety the time
necessary for writing a review, but a month passed, and a
second, and still there was silence.
Only in the Northern Beetle, in a comic article on the
singer Drabanti, who had lost his voice, there was a
contemptuous allusion to Koznishev’s book, suggesting
that the book had been long ago seen through by
everyone, and was a subject of general ridicule.
At last in the third month a critical article appeared in a
serious review. Sergey Ivanovitch knew the author of the
article. He had met him once at Golubtsov’s.
Anna Karenina
1658 of 1759
The author of the article was a young man, an invalid,
very bold as a writer, but extremely deficient in breeding
and shy in personal relations.
In spite of his absolute contempt for the author, it was
with complete respect that Sergey Ivanovitch set about
reading the article. The article was awful.
The critic had undoubtedly put an interpretation upon
the book which could not possibly be put on it. But he
had selected quotations so adroitly that for people who
had not read the book (and obviously scarcely anyone had
read it) it seemed absolutely clear that the whole book was
nothing but a medley of high-flown phrases, not even—as
suggested by marks of interrogation—used appropriately,
and that the author of the book was a person absolutely
without knowledge of the subject. And all this was so
wittingly done that Sergey Ivanovitch would not have
disowned such wit himself. But that was just what was so
awful.
In spite of the scrupulous conscientiousness with which
Sergey Ivanovitch verified the correctness of the critic’s
arguments, he did not for a minute stop to ponder over
the faults and mistakes which were ridiculed; but
unconsciously he began immediately trying to recall every
Anna Karenina
1659 of 1759
detail of his meeting and conversation with the author of
the article.
‘Didn’t I offend him in some way?’ Sergey Ivanovitch
wondered.
And remembering that when they met he had
corrected the young man about something he had said that
betrayed ignorance, Sergey Ivanovitch found the clue to
explain the article.
This article was followed by a deadly silence about the
book both in the press and in conversation, and Sergey
Ivanovitch saw that his six years’ task, toiled at with such
love and labor, had gone, leaving no trace.
Sergey Ivanovitch’s position was still more difficult
from the fact that, since he had finished his book, he had
had no more literary work to do, such as had hitherto
occupied the greater part of his time.
Sergey Ivanovitch was clever, cultivated, healthy, and
energetic, and he did not know what use to make of his
energy. Conversations in drawing rooms, in meetings,
assemblies, and committees—everywhere where talk was
possible—took up part of his time. But being used for
years to town life, he did not waste all his energies in talk,
as his less experienced younger brother did, when he was
Anna Karenina
1660 of 1759
in Moscow. He had a great deal of leisure and intellectual
energy still to dispose of.
Fortunately for him, at this period so difficult for him
from the failure of his book, the various public questions
of the dissenting sects, of the American alliance, of the
Samara famine, of exhibitions, and of spiritualism, were
definitely replaced in public interest by the Slavonic
question, which had hitherto rather languidly interested
society, and Sergey Ivanovitch, who had been one of the
first to raise this subject, threw himself into it heart and
soul.
In the circle to which Sergey Ivanovitch belonged,
nothing was talked of or written about just now but the
Servian War. Everything that the idle crowd usually does
to kill time was done now for the benefit of the Slavonic
States. Balls, concerts, dinners, matchboxes, ladies’ dresses,
beer, restaurants— everything testified to sympathy with
the Slavonic peoples.
From much of what was spoken and written on the
subject, Sergey Ivanovitch differed on various points. He
saw that the Slavonic question had become one of those
fashionable distractions which succeed one another in
providing society with an object and an occupation. He
saw, too, that a great many people were taking up the
Anna Karenina
1661 of 1759
subject from motives of self-interest and selfadvertisement. He recognized that the newspapers
published a great deal that was superfluous and
exaggerated, with the sole aim of attracting attention and
outbidding one another. He saw that in this general
movement those who thrust themselves most forward and
shouted the loudest were men who had failed and were
smarting under a sense of injury—generals without armies,
ministers not in the ministry, journalists not on any paper,
party leaders without followers. He saw that there was a
great deal in it that was frivolous and absurd. But he saw
and recognized an unmistakable growing enthusiasm,
uniting all classes, with which it was impossible not to
sympathize. The massacre of men who were fellow
Christians, and of the same Slavonic race, excited
sympathy for the sufferers and indignation against the
oppressors. And the heroism of the Servians and
Montenegrins struggling for a great cause begot in the
whole people a longing to help their brothers not in word
but in deed.
But in this there was another aspect that rejoiced
Sergey Ivanovitch. That was the manifestation of public
opinion. The public had definitely expressed its desire.
The soul of the people had, as Sergey Ivanovitch said,
Anna Karenina
1662 of 1759
found expression. And the more he worked in this cause,
the more incontestable it seemed to him that it was a cause
destined to assume vast dimensions, to create an epoch.
He threw himself heart and soul into the service of this
great cause, and forgot to think about his book. His whole
time now was engrossed by it, so that he could scarcely
manage to answer all the letters and appeals addressed to
him. He worked the whole spring and part of the summer,
and it was only in July that he prepared to go away to his
brother’s in the country.
He was going both to rest for a fortnight, and in the
very heart of the people, in the farthest wilds of the
country, to enjoy the sight of that uplifting of the spirit of
the people, of which, like all residents in the capital and
big towns, he was fully persuaded. Katavasov had long
been meaning to carry out his promise to stay with Levin,
and so he was going with him.
Anna Karenina
1663 of 1759
Chapter 2
Sergey Ivanovitch and Katavasov had only just reached
the station of the Kursk line, which was particularly busy
and full of people that day, when, looking round for the
groom who was following with their things, they saw a
party of volunteers driving up in four cabs. Ladies met
them with bouquets of flowers, and followed by the
rushing crowd they went into the station.
One of the ladies, who had met the volunteers, came
out of the hall and addressed Sergey Ivanovitch.
‘You too come to see them off?’ she asked in French.
‘No, I’m going away myself, princess. To my brother’s
for a holiday. Do you always see them of?’ said Sergey
Ivanovitch with a hardly perceptible smile.
‘Oh, that would be impossible!’ answered the princess.
‘Is it true that eight hundred have been sent from us
already? Malvinsky wouldn’t believe me.’
‘More than eight hundred. If you reckon those who
have been sent not directly from Moscow, over a
thousand,’ answered Sergey Ivanovitch.
Anna Karenina
1664 of 1759
‘There! That’s just what I said!’ exclaimed the lady.
‘And it’s true too, I suppose, that more than a million has
been subscribed?’
‘Yes, princess.’
‘What do you say to today’s telegram? Beaten the
Turks again.’
‘Yes, so I saw,’ answered Sergey Ivanovitch. They were
speaking of the last telegram stating that the Turks had
been for three days in succession beaten at all points and
put to flight, and that tomorrow a decisive engagement
was expected.
‘Ah, by the way, a splendid young fellow has asked
leave to go, and they’ve made some difficulty, I don’t
know why. I meant to ask you; I know him; please write a
note about his case. He’s being sent by Countess Lidia
Ivanovna.’
Sergey Ivanovitch asked for all the details the princess
knew about the young man, and going into the first-class
waiting-room, wrote a note to the person on whom the
granting of leave of absence depended, and handed it to
the princess.
‘You know Count Vronsky, the notorious one...is
going by this train?’ said the princess with a smile full of
Anna Karenina
1665 of 1759
triumph and meaning, when he found her again and gave
her the letter.
‘I had heard he was going, but I did not know when.
By this train?’
‘I’ve seen him. He’s here: there’s only his mother
seeing him off. It’s the best thing, anyway, that he could
do.’
‘Oh, yes, of course.’
While they were talking the crowd streamed by them
into the dining room. They went forward too, and heard a
gentleman with a glass in his hand delivering a loud
discourse to the volunteers. ‘In the service of religion,
humanity, and our brothers,’ the gentleman said, his voice
growing louder and louder; ‘to this great cause mother
Moscow dedicates you with her blessing. Jivio!’ he
concluded, loudly and tearfully.
Everyone shouted Jivio! and a fresh crowd dashed into
the hall, almost carrying the princess off her legs.
‘Ah, princess! that was something like!’ said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, suddenly appearing in the middle of the
crowd and beaming upon them with a delighted smile.
‘Capitally, warmly said, wasn’t it? Bravo! And Sergey
Ivanovitch! Why, you ought to have said something—just
a few words, you know, to encourage them; you do that
Anna Karenina
1666 of 1759
so well,’ he added with a soft, respectful, and discreet
smile, moving Sergey Ivanovitch forward a little by the
arm.
‘No, I’m just off.’
‘Where to?’
‘To the country, to my brother’s,’ answered Sergey
Ivanovitch.
‘Then you’ll see my wife. I’ve written to her, but you’ll
see her first. Please tell her that they’ve seen me and that
it’s ‘all right,’ as the English say. She’ll understand. Oh,
and be so good as to tell her I’m appointed secretary of the
committee.... But she’ll understand! You know, les petites
miseres de la vie humaine,’ he said, as it were apologizing
to the princess. ‘And Princess Myakaya—not Liza, but
Bibish—is sending a thousand guns and twelve nurses. Did
I tell you?’
‘Yes, I heard so,’ answered Koznishev indifferently.
‘It’s a pity you’re going away,’ said Stepan
Arkadyevitch. ‘Tomorrow we’re giving a dinner to two
who’re setting off— Dimer-Bartnyansky from Petersburg
and our Veslovsky, Grisha. They’re both going.
Veslovsky’s only lately married. There’s a fine fellow for
you! Eh, princess?’ he turned to the lady.
Anna Karenina
1667 of 1759
The princess looked at Koznishev without replying.
But the fact that Sergey Ivanovitch and the princess
seemed anxious to get rid of him did not in the least
disconcert Stepan Arkadyevitch. Smiling, he stared at the
feather in the princess’s hat, and then about him as though
he were going to pick something up. Seeing a lady
approaching with a collecting box, he beckoned her up
and put in a five-rouble note.
‘I can never see these collecting boxes unmoved while
I’ve money in my pocket,’ he said. ‘And how about
today’s telegram? Fine chaps those Montenegrins!’
‘You don’t say so!’ he cried, when the princess told
him that Vronsky was going by this train. For an instant
Stepan Arkadyevitch’s face looked sad, but a minute later,
when, stroking his mustaches and swinging as he walked,
he went into the hall where Vronsky was, he had
completely forgotten his own despairing sobs over his
sister’s corpse, and he saw in Vronsky only a hero and an
old friend.
‘With all his faults one can’t refuse to do him justice,’
said the princess to Sergey Ivanovitch as soon as Stepan
Arkadyevitch had left them. ‘What a typically Russian,
Slav nature! Only, I’m afraid it won’t be pleasant for
Vronsky to see him. Say what you will, I’m touched by
Anna Karenina
1668 of 1759
that man’s fate. Do talk to him a little on the way,’ said
the princess.
‘Yes, perhaps, if it happens so.’
‘I never liked him. But this atones for a great deal. He’s
not merely going himself, he’s taking a squadron at his
own expense.’
‘Yes, so I heard.’
A bell sounded. Everyone crowded to the doors.’Here
he is!’ said the princess, indicating Vronsky, who with his
mother on his arm walked by, wearing a long overcoat
and wide-brimmed black hat. Oblonsky was walking
beside him, talking eagerly of something.
Vronsky was frowning and looking straight before him,
as though he did not hear what Stepan Arkadyevitch was
saying.
Probably on Oblonsky’s pointing them out, he looked
round in the direction where the princess and Sergey
Ivanovitch were standing, and without speaking lifted his
hat. His face, aged and worn by suffering, looked stony.
Going onto the platform, Vronsky left his mother and
disappeared into a compartment.
On the platform there rang out ‘God save the Tsar,’
then shouts of ‘hurrah!’ and ‘jivio!’ One of the volunteers,
a tall, very young man with a hollow chest, was
Anna Karenina
1669 of 1759
particularly conspicuous, bowing and waving his felt hat
and a nosegay over his head. Then two officers emerged,
bowing too, and a stout man with a big beard, wearing a
greasy forage cap.
Anna Karenina
1670 of 1759
Chapter 3
Saying good-bye to the princess, Sergey Ivanovitch was
joined by Katavasov; together they got into a carriage full
to overflowing, and the train started.
At Tsaritsino station the train was met by a chorus of
young men singing ‘Hail to Thee!’ Again the volunteers
bowed and poked their heads out, but Sergey Ivanovitch
paid no attention to them. He had had so much to do
with the volunteers that the type was familiar to him and
did not interest him. Katavasov, whose scientific work had
prevented his having a chance of observing them hitherto,
was very much interested in them and questioned Sergey
Ivanovitch.
Sergey Ivanovitch advised him to go into the secondclass and talk to them himself. At the next station
Katavasov acted on this suggestion.
At the first stop he moved into the second-class and
made the acquaintance of the volunteers. They were
sitting in a corner of the carriage, talking loudly and
obviously aware that the attention of the passengers and
Katavasov as he got in was concentrated upon them. More
loudly than all talked the tall, hollow-chested young man.
Anna Karenina
1671 of 1759
He was unmistakably tipsy, and was relating some story
that had occurred at his school. Facing him sat a middleaged officer in the Austrian military jacket of the Guards
uniform. He was listening with a smile to the hollowchested youth, and occasionally pulling him up. The third,
in an artillery uniform, was sitting on a box beside them.
A fourth was asleep.
Entering into conversation with the youth, Katavasov
learned that he was a wealthy Moscow merchant who had
run through a large fortune before he was two-andtwenty. Katavasov did not like him, because he was
unmanly and effeminate and sickly. He was obviously
convinced, especially now after drinking, that he was
performing a heroic action, and he bragged of it in the
most unpleasant way.
The second, the retired officer, made an unpleasant
impression too upon Katavasov. He was, it seemed, a man
who had tried everything. He had been on a railway, had
been a land-steward, and had started factories, and he
talked, quite without necessity, of all he had done, and
used learned expressions quite inappropriately.
The third, the artilleryman, on the contrary, struck
Katavasov very favorably. He was a quiet, modest fellow,
unmistakably impressed by the knowledge of the officer
Anna Karenina
1672 of 1759
and the heroic self-sacrifice of the merchant and saying
nothing about himself. When Katavasov asked him what
had impelled him to go to Servia, he answered modestly:
‘Oh, well, everyone’s going. The Servians want help,
too. I’m sorry for them.’
‘Yes, you artillerymen especially are scarce there,’ said
Katavasov.
‘Oh, I wasn’t long in the artillery, maybe they’ll put me
into the infantry or the cavalry.’
‘Into the infantry when they need artillery more than
anything?’ said Katavasov, fancying from the artilleryman’s
apparent age that he must have reached a fairly high grade.
‘I wasn’t long in the artillery; I’m a cadet retired,’ he
said, and he began to explain how he had failed in his
examination.
All of this together made a disagreeable impression on
Katavasov, and when the volunteers got out at a station for
a drink, Katavasov would have liked to compare his
unfavorable impression in conversation with someone.
There was an old man in the carriage, wearing a military
overcoat, who had been listening all the while to
Katavasov’s conversation with the volunteers. When they
were left alone, Katavasov addressed him.
Anna Karenina
1673 of 1759
‘What different positions they come from, all those
fellows who are going off there,’ Katavasov said vaguely,
not wishing to express his own opinion, and at the same
time anxious to find out the old man’s views.
The old man was an officer who had served on two
campaigns. He knew what makes a soldier, and judging by
the appearance and the talk of those persons, by the
swagger with which they had recourse to the bottle on the
journey, he considered them poor soldiers. Moreover, he
lived in a district town, and he was longing to tell how
one soldier had volunteered from his town, a drunkard
and a thief whom no one would employ as a laborer. But
knowing by experience that in the present condition of
the public temper it was dangerous to express an opinion
opposed to the general one, and especially to criticize the
volunteers unfavorably, he too watched Katavasov without
committing himself.
‘Well, men are wanted there,’ he said, laughing with
his eyes. And they fell to talking of the last war news, and
each concealed from the other his perplexity as to the
engagement expected next day, since the Turks had been
beaten, according to the latest news, at all points. And so
they parted, neither giving expression to his opinion.
Anna Karenina
1674 of 1759
Katavasov went back to his own carriage, and with
reluctant hypocrisy reported to Sergey Ivanovitch his
observations of the volunteers, from which it would
appear that they were capital fellows.
At a big station at a town the volunteers were again
greeted with shouts and singing, again men and women
with collecting boxes appeared, and provincial ladies
brought bouquets to the volunteers and followed them
into the refreshment room; but all this was on a much
smaller and feebler scale than in Moscow.
Anna Karenina
1675 of 1759
Chapter 4
While the train was stopping at the provincial town,
Sergey Ivanovitch did not go to the refreshment room,
but walked up and down the platform.
The first time he passed Vronsky’s compartment he
noticed that the curtain was drawn over the window; but
as he passed it the second time he saw the old countess at
the window. She beckoned to Koznishev.
‘I’m going, you see, taking him as far as Kursk,’ she
said.
‘Yes, so I heard,’ said Sergey Ivanovitch, standing at her
window and peeping in. ‘What a noble act on his part!’ he
added, noticing that Vronsky was not in the compartment.
‘Yes, after his misfortune, what was there for him to
do?’
‘What a terrible thing it was!’ said Sergey Ivanovitch.
‘Ah, what I have been through! But do get in.... Ah,
what I have been through!’ she repeated, when Sergey
Ivanovitch had got in and sat down beside her. ‘You can’t
conceive it! For six weeks he did not speak to anyone, and
would not touch food except when I implored him. And
not for one minute could we leave him alone. We took
Anna Karenina
1676 of 1759
away everything he could have used against himself. We
lived on the ground floor, but there was no reckoning on
anything. You know, of course, that he had shot himself
once already on her account,’ she said, and the old lady’s
eyelashes twitched at the recollection. ‘Yes, hers was the
fitting end for such a woman. Even the death she chose
was low and vulgar.’
‘It’s not for us to judge, countess,’ said Sergey
Ivanovitch; ‘but I can understand that it has been very
hard for you.’
‘Ah, don’t speak of it! I was staying on my estate, and
he was with me. A note was brought him. He wrote an
answer and sent it off. We hadn’t an idea that she was
close by at the station. I the evening I had only just gone
to my room, when my Mary told me a lady had thrown
herself under the train. Something seemed to strike me at
once. I knew it was she. The first thing I said was, he was
not to be told. But they’d told him already. His coachman
was there and saw it all. When I ran into his room, he was
beside himself—it was fearful to see him. He didn’t say a
word, but galloped off there. I don’t know to this day
what happened there, but he was brought back at death’s
door. I shouldn’t have known him. Prostration complete,
the doctor said. And that was followed almost by madness.
Anna Karenina
1677 of 1759
Oh, why talk of it!’ said the countess with a wave of her
hand. ‘It was an awful time! No, say what you will, she
was a bad woman. Why, what is the meaning of such
desperate passions? It was all to show herself something
out of the way. Well, and that she did do. She brought
herself to ruin and two good men—her husband and my
unhappy son.’
‘And what did her husband do?’ asked Sergey
Ivanovitch.
‘He has taken her daughter. Alexey was ready to agree
to anything at first. Now it worries him terribly that he
should have given his own child away to another man.
But he can’t take back his word. Karenin came to the
funeral. But we tried to prevent his meeting Alexey. For
him, for her husband, it was easier, anyway. She had set
him free. But my poor son was utterly given up to her. He
had thrown up everything, his career, me, and even then
she had no mercy on him, but of set purpose she made his
ruin complete. No, say what you will, her very death was
the death of a vile woman, of no religious feeling. God
forgive me, but I can’t help hating the memory of her,
when I look at my son’s misery!’
‘But how is he now?’
Anna Karenina
1678 of 1759
‘It was a blessing from Providence for us—this Servian
war. I’m old, and I don’t understand the rights and wrongs
of it, but it’s come as a providential blessing to him. Of
course for me, as his mother, it’s terrible; and what’s
worse, they say, ce n’est pas tres bien vu a Petersbourg.
But it can’t be helped! It was the one thing that could
rouse him. Yashvin—a friend of his—he had lost all he
had at cards and he was going to Servia. He came to see
him and persuaded him to go. Now it’s an interest for
him. Do please talk to him a little. I want to distract his
mind. He’s so low-spirited. And as bad luck would have
it, he has toothache too. But he’ll be delighted to see you.
Please do talk to him; he’s walking up and down on that
side.’
Sergey Ivanovitch said he would be very glad to, and
crossed over to the other side of the station.
Anna Karenina
1679 of 1759
Chapter 5
In the slanting evening shadows cast by the baggage
piled up on the platform, Vronsky in his long overcoat
and slouch hat, with his hands in his pockets, strode up
and down, like a wild beast in a cage, turning sharply after
twenty paces. Sergey Ivanovitch fancied, as he approached
him, that Vronsky saw him but was pretending not to see.
This did not affect Sergey Ivanovitch in the slightest. He
was above all personal considerations with Vronsky.
At that moment Sergey Ivanovitch looked upon
Vronsky as a man taking an important part in a great
cause, and Koznishev thought it his duty to encourage
him and express his approval. He went up to him.
Vronsky stood still, looked intently at him, recognized
him, and going a few steps forward to meet him, shook
hands with him very warmly.
‘Possibly you didn’t wish to see me,’ said Sergey
Ivanovitch, ‘but couldn’t I be of use to you?’
‘There’s no one I should less dislike seeing than you,’
said Vronsky. ‘Excuse me; and there’s nothing in life for
me to like.’
Anna Karenina
1680 of 1759
‘I quite understand, and I merely meant to offer you
my services,’ said Sergey Ivanovitch, scanning Vronsky’s
face, full of unmistakable suffering. ‘Wouldn’t it be of use
to you to have a letter to Ristitch—to Milan?’
‘Oh, no!’ Vronsky said, seeming to understand him
with difficulty. ‘If you don’t mind, let’s walk on. It’s so
stuffy among the carriages. A letter? No, thank you; to
meet death one needs no letters of introduction. Nor for
the Turks...’ he said, with a smile that was merely of the
lips. His eyes still kept their look of angry suffering.
‘Yes; but you might find it easier to get into relations,
which are after all essential, with anyone prepared to see
you. But that’s as you like. I was very glad to hear of your
intention. There have been so many attacks made on the
volunteers, and a man like you raises them in public
estimation.’
‘My use as a man,’ said Vronsky, ‘is that life’s worth
nothing to me. And that I’ve enough bodily energy to cut
my way into their ranks, and to trample on them or fall—I
know that. I’m glad there’s something to give my life for,
for it’s not simply useless but loathsome to me. Anyone’s
welcome to it.’ And his jaw twitched impatiently from the
incessant gnawing toothache, that prevented him from
even speaking with a natural expression.
Anna Karenina
1681 of 1759
‘You will become another man, I predict,’ said Sergey
Ivanovitch, feeling touched. ‘To deliver one’s brothermen from bondage is an aim worth death and life. God
grant you success outwardly—and inwardly peace,’ he
added, and he held out his hand. Vronsky warmly pressed
his outstretched hand.
‘Yes, as a weapon I may be of some use. But as a man,
I’m a wreck,’ he jerked out.
He could hardly speak for the throbbing ache in his
strong teeth, that were like rows of ivory in his mouth. He
was silent, and his eyes rested on the wheels of the tender,
slowly and smoothly rolling along the rails.
And all at once a different pain, not an ache, but an
inner trouble, that set his whole being in anguish, made
him for an instant forget his toothache. As he glanced at
the tender and the rails, under the influence of the
conversation with a friend he had not met since his
misfortune, he suddenly recalled HER—that is, what was
left of her when he had run like one distraught into the
cloak room of the railway station—on the table,
shamelessly sprawling out among strangers, the
bloodstained body so lately full of life; the head unhurt
dropping back with its weight of hair, and the curling
tresses about the temples, and the exquisite face, with red,
Anna Karenina
1682 of 1759
half-opened mouth, the strange, fixed expression, piteous
on the lips and awful in the still open eyes, that seemed to
utter that fearful phrase—that he would be sorry for it—
that she had said when they were quarreling.
And he tried to think of her as she was when he met
her the first time, at a railway station too, mysterious,
exquisite, loving, seeking and giving happiness, and not
cruelly revengeful as he remembered her on that last
moment. He tried to recall his best moments with her, but
those moments were poisoned forever. He could only
think of her as triumphant, successful in her menace of a
wholly useless remorse never to be effaced. He lost all
consciousness of toothache, and his face worked with sobs.
Passing twice up and down beside the baggage in
silence and regaining his self-possession, he addressed
Sergey Ivanovitch calmly:
‘You have had no telegrams since yesterday’s? Yes,
driven back for a third time, but a decisive engagement
expected for tomorrow.’
And after talking a little more of King Milan’s
proclamation, and the immense effect it might have, they
parted, going to their carriages on hearing the second bell.
Anna Karenina
1683 of 1759
Chapter 6
Sergey Ivanovitch had not telegraphed to his brother to
send to meet him, as he did not know when he should be
able to leave Moscow. Levin was not at home when
Katavasov and Sergey Ivanovitch in a fly hired at the
station drove up to the steps of the Pokrovskoe house, as
black as Moors from the dust of the road. Kitty, sitting on
the balcony with her father and sister, recognized her
brother-in-law, and ran down to meet him.
‘What a shame not to have let us know,’ she said,
giving her hand to Sergey Ivanovitch, and putting her
forehead up for him to kiss.
‘We drove here capitally, and have not put you out,’
answered Sergey Ivanovitch. ‘I’m so dirty. I’m afraid to
touch you. I’ve been so busy, I didn’t know when I
should be able to tear myself away. And so you’re still as
ever enjoying your peaceful, quiet happiness,’ he said,
smiling, ‘out of the reach of the current in your peaceful
backwater. Here’s our friend Fyodor Vassilievitch who has
succeeded in getting here at last.’
‘But I’m not a negro, I shall look like a human being
when I wash,’ said Katavasov in his jesting fashion, and he
Anna Karenina
1684 of 1759
shook hands and smiled, his teeth flashing white in his
black face.
‘Kostya will be delighted. He has gone to his
settlement. It’s time he should be home.’
‘Busy as ever with his farming. It really is a peaceful
backwater,’ said Katavasov; ‘while we in town think of
nothing but the Servian war. Well, how does our friend
look at it? He’s sure not to think like other people.’
‘Oh, I don’t know, like everybody else,’ Kitty
answered, a little embarrassed, looking round at Sergey
Ivanovitch. ‘I’ll send to fetch him. Papa’s staying with us.
He’s only just come home from abroad.’
And making arrangements to send for Levin and for the
guests to wash, one in his room and the other in what had
been Dolly’s, and giving orders for their luncheon, Kitty
ran out onto the balcony, enjoying the freedom, and
rapidity of movement, of which she had been deprived
during the months of her pregnancy.
‘It’s Sergey Ivanovitch and Katavasov, a professor,’ she
said.
‘Oh, that’s a bore in this heat,’ said the prince.
‘No, papa, he’s very nice, and Kostya’s very fond of
him,’ Kitty said, with a deprecating smile, noticing the
irony on her father’s face.
Anna Karenina
1685 of 1759
‘Oh, I didn’t say anything.’
‘You go to them, darling,’ said Kitty to her sister, ‘and
entertain them. They saw Stiva at the station; he was quite
well. And I must run to Mitya. As ill-luck would have it, I
haven’t fed him since tea. He’s awake now, and sure to be
screaming.’ And feeling a rush of milk, she hurried to the
nursery.
This was not a mere guess; her connection with the
child was still so close, that she could gauge by the flow of
her milk his need of food, and knew for certain he was
hungry.
She knew he was crying before she reached the
nursery. And he was indeed crying. She heard him and
hastened. But the faster she went, the louder he screamed.
It was a fine healthy scream, hungry and impatient.
‘Has he been screaming long, nurse, very long?’ said
Kitty hurriedly, seating herself on a chair, and preparing to
give the baby the breast. ‘But give me him quickly. Oh,
nurse, how tiresome you are! There, tie the cap
afterwards, dol.’
The baby’s greedy scream was passing into sobs.
‘But you can’t manage so, ma’am,’ said Agafea
Mihalovna, who was almost always to be found in the
Anna Karenina
1686 of 1759
nursery. ‘He must be put straight. A-oo! a-oo!’ she
chanted over him, paying no attention to the mother.
The nurse brought the baby to his mother. Agafea
Mihalovna followed him with a face dissolving with
tenderness.
‘He knows me, he knows me. In God’s faith, Katerina
Alexandrovna, ma’am, he knew me!’ Agafea Mihalovna
cried above the baby’s screams.
But Kitty did not hear her words. Her impatience kept
growing, like the baby’s.
Their impatience hindered things for a while. The baby
could not get hold of the breast right, and was furious.
At last, after despairing, breathless screaming, and vain
sucking, things went right, and mother and child felt
simultaneously soothed, and both subsided into calm.
‘But poor darling, he’s all in perspiration!’ said Kitty in
a whisper, touching the baby.
‘What makes you think he knows you?’ she added,
with a sidelong glance at the baby’s eyes, that peered
roguishly, as she fancied, from under his cap, at his
rhythmically puffing cheeks, and the little red-palmed
hand he was waving.
Anna Karenina
1687 of 1759
‘Impossible! If he knew anyone, he would have known
me,’ said Kitty, in response to Agafea Mihalovna’s
statement, and she smiled.
She smiled because, though she said he could not know
her, in her heart she was sure that he knew not merely
Agafea Mihalovna, but that he knew and understood
everything, and knew and understood a great deal too that
no one else knew, and that she, his mother, had learned
and come to understand only through him. To Agafea
Mihalovna, to the nurse, to his grandfather, to his father
even, Mitya was a living being, requiring only materiel
care, but for his mother he had long been a mortal being,
with whom there had been a whole series of spiritual
relations already.
‘When he wakes up, please God, you shall see for
yourself. Then when I do like this, he simply beams on
me, the darling! Simply beams like a sunny day!’ said
Agafea Mihalovna.
‘Well, well then we shall see,’ whispered Kitty. ‘But
now go away, he’s going to sleep.’
Anna Karenina
1688 of 1759
Chapter 7
Agafea Mihalovna went out on tiptoe; the nurse let
down the blind, chased a fly out from under the muslin
canopy of the crib, and a bumblebee struggling on the
window-frame, and sat down waving a faded branch of
birch over the mother and the baby.
‘How hot it is! if God would send a drop of rain,’ she
said.
‘Yes, yes, sh—sh—sh—’ was all Kitty answered,
rocking a little, and tenderly squeezing the plump little
arm, with rolls of fat at the wrist, which Mitya still waved
feebly as he opened and shut his eyes. That hand worried
Kitty; she longed to kiss the little hand, but was afraid to
for fear of waking the baby. At last the little hand ceased
waving, and the eyes closed. Only from time to time, as
he went on sucking, the baby raised his long, curly
eyelashes and peeped at his mother with wet eyes, that
looked black in the twilight. The nurse had left off
fanning, and was dozing. From above came the peals of
the old prince’s voice, and the chuckle of Katavasov.
‘They have got into talk without me,’ thought Kitty,
‘but still it’s vexing that Kostya’s out. He’s sure to have
Anna Karenina
1689 of 1759
gone to the bee house again. Though it’s a pity he’s there
so often, still I’m glad. It distracts his mind. He’s become
altogether happier and better now than in the spring. He
used to be so gloomy and worried that I felt frightened for
him. And how absurd he is!’ she whispered, smiling.
She knew what worried her husband. It was his
unbelief. Although, if she had been asked whether she
supposed that in the future life, if he did not believe, he
would be damned, she would have had to admit that he
would be damned, his unbelief did not cause her
unhappiness. And she, confessing that for an unbeliever
there can be no salvation, and loving her husband’s soul
more than anything in the world, thought with a smile of
his unbelief, and told herself that he was absurd.
‘What does he keep reading philosophy of some sort
for all this year?’ she wondered. ‘If it’s all written in those
books, he can understand them. If it’s all wrong, why does
he read them? He says himself that he would like to
believe. Then why is it he doesn’t believe? Surely from his
thinking so much? And he thinks so much from being
solitary. He’s always alone, alone. He can’t talk about it all
to us. I fancy he’ll be glad of these visitors, especially
Katavasov. He likes discussions with them,’ she thought,
and passed instantly to the consideration of where it would
Anna Karenina
1690 of 1759
be more convenient to put Katavasov, to sleep alone or to
share Sergey Ivanovitch’s room. And then an idea
suddenly struck her, which made her shudder and even
disturb Mitya, who glanced severely at her. ‘I do believe
the laundress hasn’t sent the washing yet, and all the best
sheets are in use. If I don’t see to it, Agafea Mihalovna will
give Sergey Ivanovitch the wrong sheets,’ and at the very
idea of this the blood rushed to Kitty’s face.
‘Yes, I will arrange it,’ she decided, and going back to
her former thoughts, she remembered that some spiritual
question of importance had been interrupted, and she
began to recall what. ‘Yes, Kostya, an unbeliever,’ she
thought again with a smile.
‘Well, an unbeliever then! Better let him always be one
than like Madame Stahl, or what I tried to be in those days
abroad. No, he won’t ever sham anything.’
And a recent instance of his goodness rose vividly to
her mind. A fortnight ago a penitent letter had come from
Stepan Arkadyevitch to Dolly. He besought her to save his
honor, to sell her estate to pay his debts. Dolly was in
despair, she detested her husband, despised him, pitied
him, resolved on a separation, resolved to refuse, but
ended by agreeing to sell part of her property. After that,
with an irrepressible smile of tenderness, Kitty recalled her
Anna Karenina
1691 of 1759
husband’s shamefaced embarrassment, his repeated
awkward efforts to approach the subject, and how at last,
having thought of the one means of helping Dolly without
wounding her pride, he had suggested to Kitty—what had
not occurred to her before—that she should give up her
share of the property.
‘He an unbeliever indeed! With his heart, his dread of
offending anyone, even a child! Everything for others,
nothing for himself. Sergey Ivanovitch simply considers it
as Kostya’s duty to be his steward. And it’s the same with
his sister. Now Dolly and her children are under his
guardianship; all these peasants who come to him every
day, as though he were bound to be at their service.’
‘Yes, only be like your father, only like him,’ she said,
handing Mitya over to the nurse, and putting her lips to
his cheek.
Anna Karenina
1692 of 1759
Chapter 8
Ever since, by his beloved brother’s deathbed, Levin
had first glanced into the questions of life and death in the
light of these new convictions, as he called them, which
had during the period from his twentieth to his thirtyfourth year imperceptibly replaced his childish and
youthful beliefs—he had been stricken with horror, not so
much of death, as of life, without any knowledge of
whence, and why, and how, and what it was. The physical
organization, its decay, the indestructibility of matter, the
law of the conservation of energy, evolution, were the
words which usurped the place of his old belief. These
words and the ideas associated with them were very well
for intellectual purposes. But for life they yielded nothing,
and Levin felt suddenly like a man who has changed his
warm fur cloak for a muslin garment, and going for the
first time into the frost is immediately convinced, not by
reason, but by his whole nature that he is as good as
naked, and that he must infallibly perish miserably.
From that moment, though he did not distinctly face it,
and still went on living as before, Levin had never lost this
sense of terror at his lack of knowledge.
Anna Karenina
1693 of 1759
He vaguely felt, too, that what he called his new
convictions were not merely lack of knowledge, but that
they were part of a whole order of ideas, in which no
knowledge of what he needed was possible.
At first, marriage, with the new joys and duties bound
up with it, had completely crowded out these thoughts.
But of late, while he was staying in Moscow after his
wife’s confinement, with nothing to do, the question that
clamored for solution had more and more often, more and
more insistently, haunted Levin’s mind.
The question was summed up for him thus: ‘If I do not
accept the answers Christianity gives to the problems of
my life, what answers do I accept?’ And in the whole
arsenal of his convictions, so far from finding any
satisfactory answers, he was utterly unable to find anything
at all like an answer.
He was in the position of a man seeking food in toy
shops and tool shops.
Istinctively, unconsciously, with every book, with
every conversation, with every man he met, he was on the
lookout for light on these questions and their solution.
What puzzled and distracted him above everything was
that the majority of men of his age and circle had, like
him, exchanged their old beliefs for the same new
Anna Karenina
1694 of 1759
convictions, and yet saw nothing to lament in this, and
were perfectly satisfied and serene. So that, apart from the
principal question, Levin was tortured by other questions
too. Were these people sincere? he asked himself, or were
they playing a part? or was it that they understood the
answers science gave to these problems in some different,
clearer sense than he did? And he assiduously studied both
these men’s opinions and the books which treated of these
scientific explanations.
One fact he had found out since these questions had
engrossed his mind, was that he had been quite wrong in
supposing from the recollections of the circle of his young
days at college, that religion had outlived its day, and that
it was now practically non-existent. All the people nearest
to him who were good in their lives were believers. The
old prince, and Lvov, whom he liked so much, and Sergey
Ivanovitch, and all the women believed, and his wife
believed as simply as he had believed in his earliest
childhood, and ninety-nine hundredths of the Russian
people, all the working people for whose life he felt the
deepest respect, believed.
Another fact of which he became convinced, after
reading many scientific books, was that the men who
shared his views had no other construction to put on
Anna Karenina
1695 of 1759
them, and that they gave no explanation of the questions
which he felt he could not live without answering, but
simply ignored their existence and attempted to explain
other questions of no possible interest to him, such as the
evolution of organisms, the materialistic theory of
consciousness, and so forth.
Moreover, during his wife’s confinement, something
had happened that seemed extraordinary to him. He, an
unbeliever, had fallen into praying, and at the moment he
prayed, he believed. But that moment had passed, and he
could not make his state of mind at that moment fit into
the rest of his life.
He could not admit that at that moment he knew the
truth, and that now he was wrong; for as soon as he began
thinking calmly about it, it all fell to pieces. He could not
admit that he was mistaken then, for his spiritual condition
then was precious to him, and to admit that it was a proof
of weakness would have been to desecrate those moments.
He was miserably divided against himself, and strained all
his spiritual forces to the utmost to escape from this
condition.
Anna Karenina
1696 of 1759
Chapter 9
These doubts fretted and harassed him, growing weaker
or stronger from time to time, but never leaving him. He
read and thought, and the more he read and the more he
thought, the further he felt from the aim he was pursuing.
Of late in Moscow and in the country, since he had
become convinced that he would find no solution in the
materialists, he had read and reread thoroughly Plato,
Spinoza, Kant, Schelling, Hegel, and Schopenhauer, the
philosophers who gave a non-materialistic explanation of
life.
Their ideas seemed to him fruitful when he was reading
or was himself seeking arguments to refute other theories,
especially those of the materialists; but as soon as he began
to read or sought fat himself a solution of problems, the
same thing always happened. As long as he followed the
fixed definition of obscure words such as SPIRIT, WILL,
FREEDOM, ESSENCE, purposely letting himself go into
the snare of words the philosophers set for him, he seemed
to comprehend something. But he had only to forget the
artificial train of reasoning, and to turn from life itself to
what had satisfied him while thinking in accordance with
Anna Karenina
1697 of 1759
the fixed definitions, and all this artificial edifice fell to
pieces at once like a house of cards, and it became clear
that the edifice had been built up out of those transposed
words, apart from anything in life more important than
reason.
At one time, reading Schopenhauer, he put in place of
his will the word love, and for a couple of days this new
philosophy charmed him, till he removed a little away
from it. But then, when he turned from life itself to glance
at it again, it fell away too, and proved to be the same
muslin garment with no warmth in it.
His brother Sergey Ivanovitch advised him to read the
theological works of Homiakov. Levin read the second
volume of Homiakov’s works, and in spite of the elegant,
epigrammatic, argumentative style which at first repelled
him, he was impressed by the doctrine of the church he
found in them. He was struck at first by the idea that the
apprehension of divine truths had not been vouchsafed to
man, but to a corporation of men bound together by
love—to the church. What delighted him was the thought
how much easier it was to believe in a still existing living
church, embracing all the beliefs of men, and having God
at its head, and therefore holy and infallible, and from it to
accept the faith in God, in the creation, the fall, the
Anna Karenina
1698 of 1759
redemption, than to begin with God, a mysterious, faraway God, the creation, etc. But afterwards, on reading a
Catholic writer’s history of the church, and then a Greek
orthodox writer’s history of the church, and seeing that
the two churches, in their very conception infallible, each
deny the authority of the other, Homiakov’s doctrine of
the church lost all its charm for him, and this edifice
crumbled into dust like the philosophers’ edifices.
All that spring he was not himself, and went through
fearful moments of horror.
‘Without knowing what I am and why I am here, life’s
impossible; and that I can’t know, and so I can’t live,’
Levin said to himself.
‘In infinite time, in infinite matter, in infinite space, is
formed a bubble-organism, and that bubble lasts a while
and bursts, and that bubble is Me.’
It was an agonizing error, but it was the sole logical
result of ages of human thought in that direction.
This was the ultimate belief on which all the systems
elaborated by human thought in almost all their
ramifications rested. It was the prevalent conviction, and
of all other explanations Levin had unconsciously, not
knowing when or how, chosen it, as anyway the clearest,
and made it his own.
Anna Karenina
1699 of 1759
But it was not merely a falsehood, it was the cruel jeer
of some wicked power, some evil, hateful power, to
whom one could not submit.
He must escape from this power. And the means of
escape every man had in his own hands. He had but to cut
short this dependence on evil. And there was one means—
death.
And Levin, a happy father and husband, in perfect
health, was several times so near suicide that he hid the
cord that he might not be tempted to hang himself, and
was afraid to go out with his gun for fear of shooting
himself.
But Levin did not shoot himself, and did not hang
himself; he went on living.
Anna Karenina
1700 of 1759
Chapter 10
When Levin thought what he was and what he was
living for, he could find no answer to the questions and
was reduced to despair, but he left off questioning himself
about it. It seemed as though he knew both what he was
and for what he was living, for he acted and lived
resolutely and without hesitation. Indeed, in these latter
days he was far more decided and unhesitating in life than
he had ever been.
When he went back to the country at the beginning of
June, he went back also to his usual pursuits. The
management of the estate, his relations with the peasants
and the neighbors, the care of his household, the
management of his sister’s and brother’s property, of
which he had the direction, his relations with his wife and
kindred, the care of his child, and the new bee-keeping
hobby he had taken up that spring, filled all his time.
These things occupied him now, not because he
justified them to himself by any sort of general principles,
as he had done in former days; on the contrary,
disappointed by the failure of his former efforts for the
general welfare, and too much occupied with his own
Anna Karenina
1701 of 1759
thought and the mass of business with which he was
burdened from all sides, he had completely given up
thinking of the general good, and he busied himself with
all this work simply because it seemed to him that he must
do what he was doing—that he could not do otherwise.
In former days—almost from childhood, and increasingly
up to full manhood—when he had tried to do anything
that would be good for all, for humanity, for Russia, for
the whole village, he had noticed that the idea of it had
been pleasant, but the work itself had always been
incoherent, that then he had never had a full conviction of
its absolute necessity, and that the work that had begun by
seeming so great, had grown less and less, till it vanished
into nothing. But now, since his marriage, when he had
begun to confine himself more and more to living for
himself, though he experienced no delight at all at the
thought of the work he was doing, he felt a complete
conviction of its necessity, saw that it succeeded far better
than in old days, and that it kept on growing more and
more.
Now, involuntarily it seemed, he cut more and more
deeply into the soil like a plough, so that he could not be
drawn out without turning aside the furrow.
Anna Karenina
1702 of 1759
To live the same family life as his father and
forefathers—that is, in the same condition of culture—and
to bring up his children in the same, was incontestably
necessary. It was as necessary as dining when one was
hungry. And to do this, just as it was necessary to cook
dinner, it was necessary to keep the mechanism of
agriculture at Pokrovskoe going so as to yield an income.
Just as incontestably as it was necessary to repay a debt was
it necessary to keep the property in such a condition that
his son, when he received it as a heritage, would say
‘thank you’ to his father as Levin had said ‘thank you’ to
his grandfather for all he built and planted. And to do this
it was necessary to look after the land himself, not to let it,
and to breed cattle, manure the fields, and plant timber.
It was impossible not to look after the affairs of Sergey
Ivanovitch, of his sister, of the peasants who came to him
for advice and were accustomed to do so—as impossible as
to fling down a child one is carrying in one’s arms. It was
necessary to look after the comfort of his sister-in-law and
her children, and of his wife and baby, and it was
impossible not to spend with them at least a short time
each day.
Anna Karenina
1703 of 1759
And all this, together with shooting and his new beekeeping, filled up the whole of Levin’s life, which had no
meaning at all for him, when he began to think.
But besides knowing thoroughly what he had to do,
Levin knew in just the same way HOW he had to do it
all, and what was more important than the rest.
He knew he must hire laborers as cheaply as possible;
but to hire men under bond, paying them in advance at
less than the current rate of wages, was what he must not
do, even though it was very profitable. Selling straw to the
peasants in times of scarcity of provender was what he
might do, even though he felt sorry for them; but the
tavern and the pothouse must be put down, though they
were a source of income. Felling timber must be punished
as severely as possible, but he could not exact forfeits for
cattle being driven onto his fields; and though it annoyed
the keeper and made the peasants not afraid to graze their
cattle on his land, he could not keep their cattle as a
punishment.
To Pyotr, who was paying a money-lender 10 per cent
a month, he must lend a sum of money to set him free.
But he could not let off peasants who did not pay their
rent, nor let them fall into arrears. It was impossible to
overlook the bailiff’s not having mown the meadows and
Anna Karenina
1704 of 1759
letting the hay spoil; and it was equally impossible to mow
those acres where a young copse had been planted. It was
impossible to excuse a laborer who had gone home in the
busy season because his father was dying, however sorry
he might feel for him, and he must subtract from his pay
those costly months of idleness. But it was impossible not
to allow monthly rations to the old servants who were of
no use for anything.
Levin knew that when he got home he must first of all
go to his wife, who was unwell, and that the peasants who
had been waiting for three hours to see him could wait a
little longer. He knew too that, regardless of all the
pleasure he felt in taking a swarm, he must forego that
pleasure, and leave the old man to see to the bees alone,
while he talked to the peasants who had come after him to
the bee-house.
Whether he were acting rightly or wrongly he did not
know, and far from trying to prove that he was, nowadays
he avoided all thought or talk about it.
Reasoning had brought him to doubt, and prevented
him from seeing what he ought to do and what he ought
not. When he did not think, but simply lived, he was
continually aware of the presence of an infallible judge in
his soul, determining which of two possible courses of
Anna Karenina
1705 of 1759
action was the better and which was the worse, and as
soon as he did not act rightly, he was at once aware of it.
So he lived, not knowing and not seeing any chance of
knowing what he was and what he was living for, and
harassed at this lack of knowledge to such a point that he
was afraid of suicide, and yet firmly laying down his own
individual definite path in life.
Anna Karenina
1706 of 1759
Chapter 11
The day on which Sergey Ivanovitch came to
Pokrovskoe was one of Levin’s most painful days. It was
the very busiest working time, when all the peasantry
show an extraordinary intensity of self-sacrifice in labor,
such as is never shown in any other conditions of life, and
would be highly esteemed if the men who showed these
qualities themselves thought highly of them, and if it were
not repeated every year, and if the results of this intense
labor were not so simple.
To reap and bind the rye and oats and to carry it, to
mow the meadows, turn over the fallows, thrash the seed
and sow the winter corn—all this seems so simple and
ordinary; but to succeed in getting through it all everyone
in the village, from the old man to the young child, must
toil incessantly for three or four weeks, three times as hard
as usual, living on rye-beer, onions, and black bread,
thrashing and carrying the sheaves at night, and not giving
more than two or three hours in the twenty-four to sleep.
And every year this is done all over Russia.
Having lived the greater part of his life in the country
and in the closest relations with the peasants, Levin always
Anna Karenina
1707 of 1759
felt in this busy time that he was infected by this general
quickening of energy in the people.
In the early morning he rode over to the first sowing of
the rye, and to the oats, which were being carried to the
stacks, and returning home at the time his wife and sisterin-law were getting up, he drank coffee with them and
walked to the farm, where a new thrashing machine was
to be set working to get ready the seed-corn.
He was standing in the cool granary, still fragrant with
the leaves of the hazel branches interlaced on the freshly
peeled aspen beams of the new thatch roof. He gazed
through the open door in which the dry bitter dust of the
thrashing whirled and played, at the grass of the thrashing
floor in the sunlight and the fresh straw that had been
brought in from the barn, then at the speckly-headed,
white-breasted swallows that flew chirping in under the
roof and, fluttering their wings, settled in the crevices of
the doorway, then at the peasants bustling in the dark,
dusty barn, and he thought strange thoughts.
‘Why is it all being done?’ he thought. ‘Why am I
standing here, making them work? What are they all so
busy for, trying to show their zeal before me? What is that
old Matrona, my old friend, toiling for? (I doctored her,
when the beam fell on her in the fire)’ he thought,
Anna Karenina
1708 of 1759
looking at a thin old woman who was raking up the grain,
moving painfully with her bare, sun-blackened feet over
the uneven, rough floor. ‘Then she recovered, but today
or tomorrow or in ten years she won’t; they’ll bury her,
and nothing will be left either of her or of that smart girl
in the red jacket, who with that skillful, soft action shakes
the ears out of their husks. They’ll bury her and this
piebald horse, and very soon too,’ he thought, gazing at
the heavily moving, panting horse that kept walking up
the wheel that turned under him. ‘And they will bury her
and Fyodor the thrasher with his curly beard full of chaff
and his shirt torn on his white shoulders—they will bury
him. He’s untying the sheaves, and giving orders, and
shouting to the women, and quickly setting straight the
strap on the moving wheel. And what’s more, it’s not
them alone—me they’ll bury too, and nothing will be left.
What for?’
He thought this, and at the same time looked at his
watch to reckon how much they thrashed in an hour. He
wanted to know this so as to judge by it the task to set for
the day.
‘It’ll soon be one, and they’re only beginning the third
sheaf,’ thought Levin. He went up to the man that was
feeding the machine, and shouting over the roar of the
Anna Karenina
1709 of 1759
machine he told him to put it in more slowly. ‘You put in
too much at a time, Fyodor. Do you see—it gets choked,
that’s why it isn’t getting on. Do it evenly.’
Fyodor, black with the dust that clung to his moist face,
shouted something in response, but still went on doing it
as Levin did not want him to.
Levin, going up to the machine, moved Fyodor aside,
and began feeding the corn in himself. Working on till the
peasants’ dinner hour, which was not long in coming, he
went out of the barn with Fyodor and fell into talk with
him, stopping beside a neat yellow sheaf of rye laid on the
thrashing floor for seed.
Fyodor came from a village at some distance from the
one in which Levin had once allotted land to his
cooperative association. Now it had been let to a former
house porter.
Levin talked to Fyodor about this land and asked
whether Platon, a well-to-do peasant of good character
belonging to the same village, would not take the land for
the coming year.
‘It’s a high rent; it wouldn’t pay Platon, Konstantin
Dmitrievitch,’ answered the peasant, picking the ears off
his sweat-drenched shirt.
‘But how does Kirillov make it pay?’
Anna Karenina
1710 of 1759
‘Mituh!’ (so the peasant called the house porter, in a
tone of contempt), ‘you may be sure he’ll make it pay,
Konstantin Dmitrievitch! He’ll get his share, however he
has to squeeze to get it! He’s no mercy on a Christian. But
Uncle Fokanitch’ (so he called the old peasant Platon), ‘do
you suppose he’d flay the skin off a man? Where there’s
debt, he’ll let anyone off. And he’ll not wring the last
penny out. He’s a man too.’
‘But why will he let anyone off?’
‘Oh, well, of course, folks are different. One man lives
for his own wants and nothing else, like Mituh, he only
thinks of filling his belly, but Fokanitch is a righteous man.
He lives for his soul. He does not forget God.’
‘How thinks of God? How does he live for his soul?’
Levin almost shouted.
‘Why, to be sure, in truth, in God’s way. Folks are
different. Take you now, you wouldn’t wrong a man...’
‘Yes, yes, good-bye!’ said Levin, breathless with
excitement, and turning round he took his stick and
walked quickly away towards home. At the peasant’s
words that Fokanitch lived for his soul, in truth, in God’s
way, undefined but significant ideas seemed to burst out as
though they had been locked up, and all striving towards
Anna Karenina
1711 of 1759
one goal, they thronged whirling through his head,
blinding him with their light.
Anna Karenina
1712 of 1759
Chapter 12
Levin strode along the highroad, absorbed not so much
in his thoughts (he could not yet disentangle them) as in
his spiritual condition, unlike anything he had experienced
before.
The words uttered by the peasant had acted on his soul
like an electric shock, suddenly transforming and
combining into a single whole the whole swarm of
disjointed, impotent, separate thoughts that incessantly
occupied his mind. These thoughts had unconsciously
been in his mind even when he was talking about the
land.
He was aware of something new in his soul, and
joyfully tested this new thing, not yet knowing what it
was.
‘Not living for his own wants, but for God? For what
God? And could one say anything more senseless than
what he said? He said that one must not live for one’s own
wants, that is, that one must not live for what we
understand, what we are attracted by, what we desire, but
must live for something incomprehensible, for God,
whom no one can understand nor even define. What of it?
Anna Karenina
1713 of 1759
Didn’t I understand those senseless words of Fyodor’s?
And understanding them, did I doubt of their truth? Did I
think them stupid, obscure, inexact? No, I understood
him, and exactly as he understands the words. I
understood them more fully and clearly than I understand
anything in life, and never in my life have I doubted nor
can I doubt about it. And not only I, but everyone, the
whole world understands nothing fully but this, and about
this only they have no doubt and are always agreed.
‘And I looked out for miracles, complained that I did
not see a miracle which would convince me. A material
miracle would have persuaded me. And here is a miracle,
the sole miracle possible, continually existing, surrounding
me on all sides, and I never noticed it!
‘Fyodor says that Kirillov lives for his belly. That’s
comprehensible and rational. All of us as rational beings
can’t do anything else but live for our belly. And all of a
sudden the same Fyodor says that one mustn’t live for
one’s belly, but must live for truth, for God, and at a hint I
understand him! And I and millions of men, men who
lived ages ago and men living now— peasants, the poor in
spirit and the learned, who have thought and written
about it, in their obscure words saying the same thing—
we are all agreed about this one thing: what we must live
Anna Karenina
1714 of 1759
for and what is good. I and all men have only one firm,
incontestable, clear knowledge, and that knowledge
cannot be explained by the reason—it is outside it, and has
no causes and can have no effects.
‘If goodness has causes, it is not goodness; if it has
effects, a reward, it is not goodness either. So goodness is
outside the chain of cause and effect.
‘And yet I know it, and we all know it.
‘What could be a greater miracle than that?
‘Can I have found the solution of it all? can my
sufferings be over?’ thought Levin, striding along the dusty
road, not noticing the heat nor his weariness, and
experiencing a sense of relief from prolonged suffering.
This feeling was so delicious that it seemed to him
incredible. He was breathless with emotion and incapable
of going farther; he turned off the road into the forest and
lay down in the shade of an aspen on the uncut grass. He
took his hat off his hot head and lay propped on his elbow
in the lush, feathery, woodland grass.
‘Yes, I must make it clear to myself and understand,’ he
thought, looking intently at the untrampled grass before
him, and following the movements of a green beetle,
advancing along a blade of couch-grass and lifting up in its
progress a leaf of goat-weed. ‘What have I discovered?’ he
Anna Karenina
1715 of 1759
asked himself, bending aside the leaf of goat-weed out of
the beetle’s way and twisting another blade of grass above
for the beetle to cross over onto it. ‘What is it makes me
glad? What have I discovered?
‘I have discovered nothing. I have only found out what
I knew. I understand the force that in the past gave me
life, and now too gives me life. I have been set free from
falsity, I have found the Master.
‘Of old I used to say that in my body, that in the body
of this grass and of this beetle (there, she didn’t care for the
grass, she’s opened her wings and flown away), there was
going on a transformation of matter in accordance with
physical, chemical, and physiological laws. And in all of us,
as well as in the aspens and the clouds and the misty
patches, there was a process of evolution. Evolution from
what? into what?—Eternal evolution and struggle.... As
though there could be any sort of tendency and struggle in
the eternal! And I was astonished that in spite of the
utmost effort of thought along that road I could not
discover the meaning of life, the meaning of my impulses
and yearnings. Now I say that I know the meaning of my
life: ‘To live for God, for my soul.’ And this meaning, in
spite of its clearness, is mysterious and marvelous. Such,
indeed, is the meaning of everything existing. Yes, pride,’
Anna Karenina
1716 of 1759
he said to himself, turning over on his stomach and
beginning to tie a noose of blades of grass, trying not to
break them.
‘And not merely pride of intellect, but dulness of
intellect. And most of all, the deceitfulness; yes, the
deceitfulness of intellect. The cheating knavishness of
intellect, that’s it,’ he said to himself.
And he briefly went through, mentally, the whole
course of his ideas during the last two years, the beginning
of which was the clear confronting of death at the sight of
his dear brother hopelessly ill.
Then, for the first time, grasping that for every man,
and himself too, there was nothing in store but suffering,
death, and forgetfulness, he had made up his mind that life
was impossible like that, and that he must either interpret
life so that it would not present itself to him as the evil jest
of some devil, or shoot himself.
But he had not done either, but had gone on living,
thinking, and feeling, and had even at that very time
married, and had had many joys and had been happy,
when he was not thinking of the meaning of his life.
What did this mean? It meant that he had been living
rightly, but thinking wrongly.
Anna Karenina
1717 of 1759
He had lived (without being aware of it) on those
spiritual truths that he had sucked in with his mother’s
milk, but he had thought, not merely without recognition
of these truths, but studiously ignoring them.
Now it was clear to him that he could only live by
virtue of the beliefs in which he had been brought up.
‘What should I have been, and how should I have
spent my life, if I had not had these beliefs, if I had not
known that I must live for God and not for my own
desires? I should have robbed and lied and killed. Nothing
of what makes the chief happiness of my life would have
existed for me.’ And with the utmost stretch of
imagination he could not conceive the brutal creature he
would have been himself, if he had not known what he
was living for.
‘I looked for an answer to my question. And thought
could not give an answer to my question—it is
incommensurable with my question. The answer has been
given me by life itself, in my knowledge of what is right
and what is wrong. And that knowledge I did not arrive at
in any way, it was given to me as to all men, GIVEN,
because I could not have got it from anywhere.
‘Where could I have got it? By reason could I have
arrived at knowing that I must love my neighbor and not
Anna Karenina
1718 of 1759
oppress him? I was told that in my childhood, and I
believed it gladly, for they told me what was already in my
soul. But who discovered it? Not reason. Reason
discovered the struggle for existence, and the law that
requires us to oppress all who hinder the satisfaction of our
desires. That is the deduction of reason. But loving one’s
neighbor reason could never discover, because it’s
irrational.’
Anna Karenina
1719 of 1759
Chapter 13
And Levin remembered a scene he had lately witnessed
between Dolly and her children. The children, left to
themselves, had begun cooking raspberries over the
candles and squirting milk into each other’s mouths with a
syringe. Their mother, catching them at these pranks,
began reminding them in Levin’s presence of the trouble
their mischief gave to the grown-up people, and that this
trouble was all for their sake, and that if they smashed the
cups they would have nothing to drink their tea out of,
and that if they wasted the milk, they would have nothing
to eat, and die of hunger.
And Levin had been struck by the passive, weary
incredulity with which the children heard what their
mother said to them. They were simply annoyed that their
amusing play had been interrupted, and did not believe a
word of what their mother was saying. They could not
believe it indeed, for they could not take in the immensity
of all they habitually enjoyed, and so could not conceive
that what they were destroying was the very thing they
lived by.
Anna Karenina
1720 of 1759
‘That all comes of itself,’ they thought, ‘and there’s
nothing interesting or important about it because it has
always been so, and always will be so. And it’s all always
the same. We’ve no need to think about that, it’s all ready.
But we want to invent something of our own, and new.
So we thought of putting raspberries in a cup, and
cooking them over a candle, and squirting milk straight
into each other’s mouths. That’s fun, and something new,
and not a bit worse than drinking out of cups.’
‘Isn’t it just the same that we do, that I did, searching
by the aid of reason for the significance of the forces of
nature and the meaning of the life of man?’ he thought.
‘And don’t all the theories of philosophy do the same,
trying by the path of thought, which is strange and not
natural to man, to bring him to a knowledge of what he
has known long ago, and knows so certainly that he could
not live at all without it? Isn’t it distinctly to be seen in the
development of each philosopher’s theory, that he knows
what is the chief significance of life beforehand, just as
positively as the peasant Fyodor, and not a bit more clearly
than he, and is simply trying by a dubious intellectual path
to come back to what everyone knows?
‘Now then, leave the children to themselves to get
things alone and make their crockery, get the milk from
Anna Karenina
1721 of 1759
the cows, and so on. Would they be naughty then? Why,
they’d die of hunger! Well, then, leave us with our
passions and thoughts, without any idea of the one God,
of the Creator, or without any idea of what is right,
without any idea of moral evil.
‘Just try and build up anything without those ideas!
‘We only try to destroy them, because we’re spiritually
provided for. Exactly like the children!
‘Whence have I that joyful knowledge, shared with the
peasant, that alone gives peace to my soul? Whence did I
get it?
‘Brought up with an idea of God, a Christian, my
whole life filled with the spiritual blessings Christianity has
given me, full of them, and living on those blessings, like
the children I did not understand them, and destroy, that
is try to destroy, what I live by. And as soon as an
important moment of life comes, like the children when
they are cold and hungry, I turn to Him, and even less
than the children when their mother scolds them for their
childish mischief, do I feel that my childish efforts at
wanton madness are reckoned against me.
‘Yes, what I know, I know not by reason, but it has
been given to me, revealed to me, and I know it with my
heart, by faith in the chief thing taught by the church.
Anna Karenina
1722 of 1759
‘The church! the church!’ Levin repeated to himself.
He turned over on the other side, and leaning on his
elbow, fell to gazing into the distance at a herd of cattle
crossing over to the river.
‘But can I believe in all the church teaches?’ he
thought, trying himself, and thinking of everything that
could destroy his present peace of mind. Itentionally he
recalled all those doctrines of the church which had always
seemed most strange and had always been a stumbling
block to him.
‘The Creation? But how did I explain existence? By
existence? By nothing? The devil and sin. But how do I
explain evil?... The atonement?...
‘But I know nothing, nothing, and I can know nothing
but what has been told to me and all men.’
And it seemed to him that there was not a single article
of faith of the church which could destroy the chief
thing—faith in God, in goodness, as the one goal of man’s
destiny.
Under every article of faith of the church could be put
the faith in the service of truth instead of one’s desires.
And each doctrine did not simply leave that faith
unshaken, each doctrine seemed essential to complete that
great miracle, continually manifest upon earth, that made
Anna Karenina
1723 of 1759
it possible for each man and millions of different sorts of
men, wise men and imbeciles, old men and children—all
men, peasants, Lvov, Kitty, beggars and kings to
understand perfectly the same one thing, and to build up
thereby that life of the soul which alone is worth living,
and which alone is precious to us.
Lying on his back, he gazed up now into the high,
cloudless sky. ‘Do I not know that that is infinite space,
and that it is not a round arch? But, however I screw up
my eyes and strain my sight, I cannot see it not round and
not bounded, and in spite of my knowing about infinite
space, I am incontestably right when I see a solid blue
dome, and more right than when I strain my eyes to see
beyond it.’
Levin ceased thinking, and only, as it were, listened to
mysterious voices that seemed talking joyfully and
earnestly within him.
‘Can this be faith?’ he thought, afraid to believe in his
happiness. ‘My God, I thank Thee!’ he said, gulping down
his sobs, and with both hands brushing away the tears that
filled his eyes.
Anna Karenina
1724 of 1759
Chapter 14
Levin looked before him and saw a herd of cattle, then
he caught sight of his trap with Raven in the shafts, and
the coachman, who, driving up to the herd, said
something to the herdsman. Then he heard the rattle of
the wheels and the snort of the sleek horse close by him.
But he was so buried in his thoughts that he did not even
wonder why the coachman had come for him.
He only thought of that when the coachman had
driven quite up to him and shouted to him. ‘The mistress
sent me. Your brother has come, and some gentleman
with him.’
Levin got into the trap and took the reins. As though
just roused out of sleep, for a long while Levin could not
collect his faculties. He stared at the sleek horse flecked
with lather between his haunches and on his neck, where
the harness rubbed, stared at Ivan the coachman sitting
beside him, and remembered that he was expecting his
brother, thought that his wife was most likely uneasy at his
long absence, and tried to guess who was the visitor who
had come with his brother. And his brother and his wife
and the unknown guest seemed to him now quite
Anna Karenina
1725 of 1759
different from before. He fancied that now his relations
with all men would be different.
‘With my brother there will be none of that aloofness
there always used to be between us, there will be no
disputes; with Kitty there shall never be quarrels; with the
visitor, whoever he may be, I will be friendly and nice;
with the servants, with Ivan, it will all be different.’
Pulling the stiff rein and holding in the good horse that
snorted with impatience and seemed begging to be let go,
Levin looked round at Ivan sitting beside him, not
knowing what to do with his unoccupied hand,
continually pressing down his shirt as it puffed out, and he
tried to find something to start a conversation about with
him. He would have said that Ivan had pulled the saddlegirth up too high, but that was like blame, and he longed
for friendly, warm talk. Nothing else occurred to him.
‘Your honor must keep to the right and mind that
stump,’ said the coachman, pulling the rein Levin held.
‘Please don’t touch and don’t teach me!’ said Levin,
angered by this interference. Now, as always, interference
made him angry, and he felt sorrowfully at once how
mistaken had been his supposition that his spiritual
condition could immediately change him in contact with
reality.
Anna Karenina
1726 of 1759
He was not a quarter of a mile from home when he
saw Grisha and Tanya running to meet him.
‘Uncle Kostya! mamma’s coming, and grandfather, and
Sergey Ivanovitch, and someone else,’ they said,
clambering up into the trap.
‘Who is he?’
‘An awfully terrible person! And he does like this with
his arms,’ said Tanya, getting up in the trap and mimicking
Katavasov.
‘Old or young?’ asked Levin, laughing, reminded of
someone, he did not know whom, by Tanya’s
performance.
‘Oh, I hope it’s not a tiresome person!’ thought Levin.
As soon as he turned, at a bend in the road, and saw the
party coming, Levin recognized Katavasov in a straw hat,
walking along swinging his arms just as Tanya had shown
him. Katavasov was very fond of discussing metaphysics,
having derived his notions from natural science writers
who had never studied metaphysics, and in Moscow Levin
had had many arguments with him of late.
And one of these arguments, in which Katavasov had
obviously considered that he came off victorious, was the
first thing Levin thought of as he recognized him.
Anna Karenina
1727 of 1759
‘No, whatever I do, I won’t argue and give utterance
to my ideas lightly,’ he thought.
Getting out of the trap and greeting his brother and
Katavasov, Levin asked about his wife.
‘She has taken Mitya to Kolok’ (a copse near the
house). ‘She meant to have him out there because it’s so
hot indoors,’ said Dolly. Levin had always advised his wife
not to take the baby to the wood, thinking it unsafe, and
he was not pleased to hear this.
‘She rushes about from place to place with him,’ said
the prince, smiling. ‘I advised her to try putting him in the
ice cellar.’
‘She meant to come to the bee house. She thought you
would be there. We are going there,’ said Dolly.
‘Well, and what are you doing?’ said Sergey Ivanovitch,
falling back from the rest and walking beside him.
‘Oh, nothing special. Busy as usual with the land,’
answered Levin. ‘Well, and what about you? Come for
long? We have been expecting you for such a long time.’
‘Only for a fortnight. I’ve a great deal to do in
Moscow.’
At these words the brothers’ eyes met, and Levin, in
spite of the desire he always had, stronger than ever just
now, to be on affectionate and still more open terms with
Anna Karenina
1728 of 1759
his brother, felt an awkwardness in looking at him. He
dropped his eyes and did not know what to say.
Casting over the subjects of conversation that would be
pleasant to Sergey Ivanovitch, and would keep him off the
subject of the Servian war and the Slavonic question, at
which he had hinted by the allusion to what he had to do
in Moscow, Levin began to talk of Sergey Ivanovitch’s
book.
‘Well, have there been reviews of your book?’ he
asked.
Sergey Ivanovitch smiled at the intentional character of
the question.
‘No one is interested in that now, and I less than
anyone,’ he said. ‘Just look, Darya Alexandrovna, we shall
have a shower,’ he added, pointing with a sunshade at the
white rain clouds that showed above the aspen tree-tops.
And these words were enough to reestablish again
between the brothers that tone—hardly hostile, but
chilly—which Levin had been so longing to avoid.
Levin went up to Katavasov.
‘It was jolly of you to make up your mind to come,’ he
said to him.
Anna Karenina
1729 of 1759
‘I’ve been meaning to a long while. Now we shall have
some discussion, we’ll see to that. Have you been reading
Spencer?’
‘No, I’ve not finished reading him,’ said Levin. ‘But I
don’t need him now.’
‘How’s that? that’s interesting. Why so?’
‘I mean that I’m fully convinced that the solution of
the problems that interest me I shall never find in him and
his like. Now..’
But Katavasov’s serene and good-humored expression
suddenly struck him, and he felt such tenderness for his
own happy mood, which he was unmistakably disturbing
by this conversation, that he remembered his resolution
and stopped short.
‘But we’ll talk later on,’ he added. ‘If we’re going to
the bee house, it’s this way, along this little path,’ he said,
addressing them all.
Going along the narrow path to a little uncut meadow
covered on one side with thick clumps of brilliant heart’sease among which stood up here and there tall, dark green
tufts of hellebore, Levin settled his guests in the dense,
cool shade of the young aspens on a bench and some
stumps purposely put there for visitors to the bee house
who might be afraid of the bees, and he went off himself
Anna Karenina
1730 of 1759
to the hut to get bread, cucumbers, and fresh honey, to
regale them with.
Trying to make his movements as deliberate as possible,
and listening to the bees that buzzed more and more
frequently past him, he walked along the little path to the
hut. In the very entry one bee hummed angrily, caught in
his beard, but he carefully extricated it. Going into the
shady outer room, he took down from the wall his veil,
that hung on a peg, and putting it on, and thrusting his
hands into his pockets, he went into the fenced-in beegarden, where there stood in the midst of a closely mown
space in regular rows, fastened with bast on posts, all the
hives he knew so well, the old stocks, each with its own
history, and along the fences the younger swarms hived
that year. In front of the openings of the hives, it made his
eyes giddy to watch the bees and drones whirling round
and round about the same spot, while among them the
working bees flew in and out with spoils or in search of
them, always in the same direction into the wood to the
flowering lime trees and back to the hives.
His ears were filled with the incessant hum in various
notes, now the busy hum of the working bee flying
quickly off, then the blaring of the lazy drone, and the
excited buzz of the bees on guard protecting their
Anna Karenina
1731 of 1759
property from the enemy and preparing to sting. On the
farther side of the fence the old bee-keeper was shaving a
hoop for a tub, and he did not see Levin. Levin stood still
in the midst of the beehives and did not call him.
He was glad of a chance to be alone to recover from
the influence of ordinary actual life, which had already
depressed his happy mood. He thought that he had already
had time to lose his temper with Ivan, to show coolness to
his brother, and to talk flippantly with Katavasov.
‘Can it have been only a momentary mood, and will it
pass and leave no trace?’ he thought. But the same instant,
going back to his mood, he felt with delight that
something new and important had happened to him. Real
life had only for a time overcast the spiritual peace he had
found, but it was still untouched within him.
Just as the bees, whirling round him, now menacing
him and distracting his attention, prevented him from
enjoying complete physical peace, forced him to restrain
his movements to avoid them, so had the petty cares that
had swarmed about him from the moment he got into the
trap restricted his spiritual freedom; but that lasted only so
long as he was among them. Just as his bodily strength was
still unaffected, in spite of the bees, so too was the spiritual
strength that he had just become aware of.
Anna Karenina
1732 of 1759
Chapter 15
‘Do you know, Kostya, with whom Sergey Ivanovitch
traveled on his way here?’ said Dolly, doling out
cucumbers and honey to the children; ‘with Vronsky! He’s
going to Servia.’
‘And not alone; he’s taking a squadron out with him at
his own expense,’ said Katavasov.
‘That’s the right thing for him,’ said Levin. ‘Are
volunteers still going out then?’ he added, glancing at
Sergey Ivanovitch.
Sergey Ivanovitch did not answer. He was carefully
with a blunt knife getting a live bee covered with sticky
honey out of a cup full of white honeycomb.
‘I should think sol You should have seen what was
going on at the station yesterday!’ said Katavasov, biting
with a juicy sound into a cucumber.
‘Well, what is one to make of it? For mercy’s sake, do
explain to me, Sergey Ivanovitch, where are all those
volunteers going, whom are they fighting with?’ asked the
old prince, unmistakably taking up a conversation that had
sprung up in Levin’s absence.
Anna Karenina
1733 of 1759
‘With the Turks,’ Sergey Ivanovitch answered, smiling
serenely, as he extricated the bee, dark with honey and
helplessly kicking, and put it with the knife on a stout
aspen leaf.
‘But who has declared war on the Turks?—Ivan
Ivanovitch Ragozov and Countess Lidia Ivanovna, assisted
by Madame Stahl?’
‘No one has declared war, but people sympathize with
their neighbors’ sufferings and are eager to help them,’ said
Sergey Ivanovitch.
‘But the prince is not speaking of help,’ said Levin,
coming to the assistance of his father-in-law, ‘but of war.
The prince says that private persons cannot take part in
war without the permission of the government.’
‘Kostya, mind, that’s a bee! Really, they’ll sting us!’ said
Dolly, waving away a wasp.
‘But that’s not a bee, it’s a wasp,’ said Levin.
‘Well now, well, what’s your own theory?’ Katavasov
said to Levin with a smile, distinctly challenging him to a
discussion. ‘Why have not private persons the right to do
so?’
‘Oh, my theory’s this: war is on one side such a beastly,
cruel, and awful thing, that no one man, not to speak of a
Christian, can individually take upon himself the
Anna Karenina
1734 of 1759
responsibility of beginning wars; that can only be done by
a government, which is called upon to do this, and is
driven inevitably into war. On the other hand, both
political science and common sense teach us that in
matters of state, and especially in the matter of war, private
citizens must forego their personal individual
Sergey Ivanovitch and Katavasov had their replies
ready, and both began speaking at the same time.
‘But the point is, my dear fellow, that there may be
cases when the government does not carry out the will of
the citizens and then the public asserts its will,’ said
Katavasov.
But evidently Sergey Ivanovitch did not approve of this
answer. His brows contracted at Katavasov’s words and he
said something else.
‘You don’t put the matter in its true light. There is no
question here of a declaration of war, but simply the
expression of a human Christian feeling. Our brothers,
one with us in religion and in race, are being massacred.
Even supposing they were not our brothers nor fellowChristians, but simply children, women, old people,
feeling is aroused and Russians go eagerly to help in
stopping these atrocities. Fancy, if you were going along
the street and saw drunken men beating a woman or a
Anna Karenina
1735 of 1759
child—I imagine you would not stop to inquire whether
war had been declared on the men, but would throw
yourself on them, and protect the victim.’
‘But I should not kill them,’ said Levin.
‘Yes, you would kill them.’
‘I don’t know. If I saw that, I might give way to my
impulse of the moment, but I can’t say beforehand. And
such a momentary impulse there is not, and there cannot
be, in the case of the oppression of the Slavonic peoples.’
‘Possibly for you there is not; but for others there is,’
said Sergey Ivanovitch, frowning with displeasure. ‘There
are traditions still extant among the people of Slavs of the
true faith suffering under the yoke of the ‘unclean sons of
Hagar.’ The people have heard of the sufferings of their
brethren and have spoken.’
‘Perhaps so,’ said Levin evasively; ‘but I don’t see it.
I’m one of the people myself, and I don’t feel it.’
‘Here am I too,’ said the old prince. ‘I’ve been staying
abroad and reading the papers, and I must own, up to the
time of the Bulgarian atrocities, I couldn’t make out why
it was all the Russians were all of a sudden so fond of their
Slavonic brethren, while I didn’t feel the slightest affection
for them. I was very much upset, thought I was a monster,
or that it was the influence of Carlsbad on me. But since I
Anna Karenina
1736 of 1759
have been here, my mind’s been set at rest. I see that there
are people besides me who’re only interested in Russia,
and not in their Slavonic brethren. Here’s Konstantin too.’
‘Personal opinions mean nothing in such a case,’ said
Sergey Ivanovitch; ‘it’s not a matter of personal opinions
when all Russia—the whole people—has expressed its
will.’
‘But excuse me, I don’t see that. The people don’t
know anything about it, if you come to that,’ said the old
prince.
‘Oh, papa!...how can you say that? And last Sunday in
church?’ said Dolly, listening to the conversation. ‘Please
give me a cloth,’ she said to the old man, who was looking
at the children with a smile. ‘Why, it’s not possible that
all..’
‘But what was it in church on Sunday? The priest had
been told to read that. He read it. They didn’t understand
a word of it. Then they were told that there was to be a
collection for a pious object in church; well, they pulled
out their halfpence and gave them, but what for they
couldn’t say.’
‘The people cannot help knowing; the sense of their
own destinies is always in the people, and at such
moments as the present that sense finds utterance,’ said
Anna Karenina
1737 of 1759
Sergey Ivanovitch with conviction, glancing at the old
bee-keeper.
The handsome old man, with black grizzled beard and
thick silvery hair, stood motionless, holding a cup of
honey, looking down from the height of his tall figure
with friendly serenity at the gentlefolk, obviously
understanding nothing of their conversation and not
caring to understand it.
‘That’s so, no doubt,’ he said, with a significant shake
of his head at Sergey Ivanovitch’s words.
‘Here, then, ask him. He knows nothing about it and
thinks nothing,’ said Levin. ‘Have you heard about the
war, Mihalitch?’ he said, turning to him. ‘What they read
in the church? What do you think about it? Ought we to
fight for the Christians?’
‘What should we think? Alexander Nikolaevitch our
Emperor has thought for us; he thinks for us indeed in all
things. It’s clearer for hint to see. Shall I bring a bit more
bread? Give the little lad some more?’ he said addressing
Darya Alexandrovna and pointing to Grisha, who had
finished his crust.
‘I don’t need to ask,’ said Sergey Ivanovitch, ‘we have
seen and are seeing hundreds and hundreds of people who
give up everything to sense a just cause, come from every
Anna Karenina
1738 of 1759
part of Russia, and directly and clearly express their
thought and aim. They bring their halfpence or go
themselves and say directly what for. What does it mean?’
‘It means, to my thinking,’ said Levin, who was
beginning to get warm, ‘that among eighty millions of
people there can always be found not hundreds, as now,
but tens of thousands of people who have lost caste, ne’erdo-wells, who are always ready to go anywhere—to
Pogatchev’s bands, to Khiva, to Serbia..’
‘I tell you that it’s not a case of hundreds or of ne’erdo-wells, but the best representatives of the people!’ said
Sergey Ivanovitch, with as much irritation as if he were
defending the last penny of his fortune. ‘And what of the
subscriptions? In this case it is a whole people directly
expressing their will.’
‘That word ‘people’ is so vague,’ said Levin. ‘Parish
clerks, teachers, and one in a thousand of the peasants,
maybe, know what it’s all about. The rest of the eighty
millions, like Mihalitch, far from expressing their will,
haven’t the faintest idea what there is for them to express
their will about. What right have we to say that this is the
people’s will?’
Anna Karenina
1739 of 1759
Chapter 16
Sergey Ivanovitch, being practiced in argument, did
not reply, but at once turned the conversation to another
aspect of the subject.
‘Oh, if you want to learn the spirit of the people by
arithmetical computation, of course it’s very difficult to
arrive at it. And voting has not been introduced among us
and cannot be introduced, for it does not express the will
of the people; but there are other ways of reaching that. It
is felt in the air, it is felt by the heart. I won’t speak of
those deep currents which are astir in the still ocean of the
people, and which are evident to every unprejudiced man;
let us look at society in the narrow sense. All the most
diverse sections of the educated public, hostile before, are
merged in one. Every division is at an end, all the public
organs say the same thing over and over again, all feel the
mighty torrent that has overtaken them and is carrying
them in one direction.’
‘Yes, all the newspapers do say the same thing,’ said the
prince. ‘That’s true. But so it is the same thing that all the
frogs croak before a storm. One can hear nothing for
them.’
Anna Karenina
1740 of 1759
‘Frogs or no frogs, I’m not the editor of a paper and I
don’t want to defend them; but I am speaking of the
unanimity in the intellectual world,’ said Sergey
Ivanovitch, addressing his brother. Levin would have
answered, but the old prince interrupted him.
‘Well, about that unanimity, that’s another thing, One
may say,’ said the prince. ‘There’s my son-in-law, Stepan
Arkadyevitch, you know him. He’s got a place now on
the committee of a commission and something or other, I
don’t remember. Only there’s nothing to do in it—why,
Dolly, it’s no secret!—and a salary of eight thousand. You
try asking him whether his post is of use, he’ll prove to
you that it’s most necessary. And he’s a truthful man too,
but there’s no refusing to believe in the utility of eight
thousand roubles.’
‘Yes, he asked me to give a message to Darya
Alexandrovna about the post,’ said Sergey Ivanovitch
reluctantly, feeling the prince’s remark to be ill-timed.
‘So it is with the unanimity of the press. That’s been
explained to me: as soon as there’s war their incomes are
doubled. How can they help believing in the destinies of
the people and the Slavonic races...and all that?’
‘I don’t care for many of the papers, but that’s unjust,’
said Sergey Ivanovitch.
Anna Karenina
1741 of 1759
‘I would only make one condition,’ pursued the old
prince. ‘Alphonse Karr said a capital thing before the war
with Prussia: ‘You consider war to be inevitable? Very
good. Let everyone who advocates war be enrolled in a
special regiment of advance-guards, for the front of every
storm, of every attack, to lead them all!’’
‘A nice lot the editors would make!’ said Katavasov,
with a loud roar, as he pictured the editors he knew in this
picked legion.
‘But they’d run,’ said Dolly, ‘they’d only be in the
way.’
‘Oh, if they ran away, then we’d have grape-shot or
Cossacks with whips behind them,’ said the prince.
‘But that’s a joke, and a poor one too, if you’ll excuse
my saying so, prince,’ said Sergey Ivanovitch.
‘I don’t see that it was a joke, that...’ Levin was
beginning, but Sergey Ivanovitch interrupted him.
‘Every member of society is called upon to do his own
special work,’ said he. ‘And men of thought are doing
their work when they express public opinion. And the
single-hearted and full expression of public opinion is the
service of-the press and a phenomenon to rejoice us at the
same time. Twenty years ago we should have been silent,
but now we have heard the voice of the Russian people,
Anna Karenina
1742 of 1759
which is ready to rise as one man and ready to sacrifice
itself for its oppressed brethren; that is a great step and a
proof of strength.’
‘But it’s not only making a sacrifice. but killing Turks,’
said Levin timidly. ‘The people make sacrifices and are
ready to make sacrifices for their soul, but not for murder,’
he added, instinctively connecting the conversation with
the ideas that had been absorbing his mind.
‘For their soul? That’s a most puzzling expression for a
natural science man, do you understand? What sort of
thing is the soul?’ said Katavasov, smiling.
‘Oh, you know!’
‘No, by God, I haven’t the faintest idea!’ said Katavasov
with a loud roar of laughter.
‘‘I bring not peace, but a sword,’ says Christ,’ Sergey
Ivanovitch rejoined for his part, quoting as simply as
though it were the easiest thing to understand the very
passage that had always puzzled Levin most.
‘That’s so, no doubt,’ the old man repeated again. He
was standing near them and responded to a chance glance
turned in his direction.
‘Ah, my dear fellow, you’re defeated, utterly defeated!’
cried Katavasov good-humoredly.
Anna Karenina
1743 of 1759
Levin reddened with vexation, not at being defeated,
but at having failed to control himself and being drawn
into argument.
‘No, I can’t argue with them,’ he thought; ‘they wear
impenetrable armor, while I’m naked.’
He saw that it was impossible to convince his brother
and Katavasov, and he saw even less possibility of himself
agreeing with them. What they advocated was the very
pride of intellect that had almost been his ruin. He could
not admit that some dozens of men, among them his
brother, had the right, on the ground of what they were
told by some hundreds of glib volunteers swarming to the
capital, to say that they and the newspapers were
expressing the will and feeling of the people, and a feeling
which was expressed in vengeance and murder. He could
not admit this, because he neither saw the expression of
such feelings in the people among whom he was living,
nor found them in himself (and he could not but consider
himself one of the persons making up the Russian people),
and most of all because he, like the people, did not know
and could not know what is for the general good, though
he knew beyond a doubt that this general good could be
attained only by the strict observance of that law of right
and wrong which has been revealed to every man, and
Anna Karenina
1744 of 1759
therefore he could not wish for war or advocate war for
any general objects whatever. He said as Mihalitch did and
the people, who had expressed their feeling in the
traditional invitations of the Varyagi: ‘Be princes and rule
over us. Gladly we promise complete submission. All the
labor, all humiliations, all sacrifices we take upon
ourselves; but we will not judge and decide.’ And now,
according to Sergey Ivanovitch’s account, the people had
foregone this privilege they had bought at such a costly
price.
He wanted to say too that if public opinion were an
infallible guide, then why were not revolutions and the
commune as lawful as the movement in favor of the
Slavonic peoples? But these were merely thoughts that
could settle nothing. One thing could be seen beyond
doubt—that was that at the actual moment the discussion
was irritating Sergey Ivanovitch, and so it was wrong to
continue it. And Levin ceased speaking and then called the
attention of his guests to the fact that the storm clouds
were gathering, and that they had better be going home
before it rained.
Anna Karenina
1745 of 1759
Chapter 17
The old prince and Sergey Ivanovitch got into the trap
and drove off; the rest of the party hastened homewards
on foot.
But the storm-clouds, turning white and then black,
moved down so quickly that they had to quicken their
pace to get home before the rain. The foremost clouds,
lowering and black as soot-laden smoke, rushed with
extraordinary swiftness over the sky. They were still two
hundred paces from home and a gust of wind had already
blown up, and every second the downpour might be
looked for.
The children ran ahead with frightened and gleeful
shrieks. Darya Alexandrovna, struggling painfully with her
skirts that clung round her legs, was not walking, but
running, her eyes fixed on the children. The men of the
party, holding their hats on, strode with long steps beside
her. They were just at the steps when a big drop fell
splashing on the edge of the iron guttering. The children
and their elders after them ran into the shelter of the
house, talking merrily.
Anna Karenina
1746 of 1759
‘Katerina Alexandrovna?’ Levin asked of Agafea
Mihalovna, who met them with kerchiefs and rugs in the
hall.
‘We thought she was with you,’ she said.
‘And Mitya?’
‘In the copse, he must be, and the nurse with him.’
Levin snatched up the rugs and ran towards the copse.
In that brief interval of time the storm clouds had
moved on, covering the sun so completely that it was dark
as an eclipse. Stubbornly, as though insisting on its rights,
the wind stopped Levin, and tearing the leaves and flowers
off the lime trees and stripping the white birch branches
into strange unseemly nakedness, it twisted everything on
one side—acacias, flowers, burdocks, long grass, and tall
tree-tops. The peasant girls working in the garden ran
shrieking into shelter in the servants’ quarters. The
streaming rain had already flung its white veil over all the
distant forest and half the fields close by, and was rapidly
swooping down upon the copse. The wet of the rain
spurting up in tiny drops could be smelt in the air.
Holding his head bent down before him, and struggling
with the wind that strove to tear the wraps away from
him, Levin was moving up to the copse and had just
caught sight of something white behind the oak tree,
Anna Karenina
1747 of 1759
when there was a sudden flash, the whole earth seemed on
fire, and the vault of heaven seemed crashing overhead.
Opening his blinded eyes, Levin gazed through the thick
veil of rain that separated him now from the copse, and to
his horror the first thing he saw was the green crest of the
familiar oak-tree in the middle of the copse uncannily
changing its position. ‘Can it have been struck?’ Levin
hardly had time to think when, moving more and more
rapidly, the oak tree vanished behind the other trees, and
he heard the crash of the great tree falling upon the others.
The flash of lightning, the crash of thunder, and the
instantaneous chill that ran through him were all merged
for Levin in one sense of terror.
‘My God! my God! not on them!’ he said.
And though he thought at once how senseless was his
prayer that they should not have been killed by the oak
which had fallen now, he repeated it, knowing that he
could do nothing better than utter this senseless prayer.
Running up to the place where they usually went, he
did not find them there.
They were at the other end of the copse under an old
lime-tree; they were calling him. Two figures in dark
dresses (they had been light summer dresses when they
started out) were standing bending over something. It was
Anna Karenina
1748 of 1759
Kitty with the nurse. The rain was already ceasing, and it
was beginning to get light when Levin reached them. The
nurse was not wet on the lower part of her dress, but Kitty
was drenched through, and her soaked clothes clung to
her. Though the rain was over, they still stood in the same
position in which they had been standing when the storm
broke. Both stood bending over a perambulator with a
green umbrella.
‘Alive? Unhurt? Thank God!’ he said, splashing with
his soaked boots through the standing water and running
up to them.
Kitty’s rosy wet face was turned towards him, and she
smiled timidly under her shapeless sopped hat.
‘Aren’t you ashamed of yourself? I can’t think how you
can be so reckless!’ he said angrily to his wife.
‘It wasn’t my fault, really. We were just meaning to go,
when he made such a to-do that we had to change him.
We were just...’ Kitty began defending herself.
Mitya was unharmed, dry, and still fast asleep.
‘Well, thank God! I don’t know what I’m saying!’
They gathered up the baby’s wet belongings; the nurse
picked up the baby and carried it. Levin walked beside his
wife, and, penitent for having been angry, he squeezed her
hand when the nurse was not looking.
Anna Karenina
1749 of 1759
Chapter 18
During the whole of that day, in the extremely
different conversations in which he took part, only as it
were with the top layer of his mind, in spite of the
disappointment of not finding the change he expected in
himself, Levin had been all the while joyfully conscious of
the fulness of his heart.
After the rain it was too wet to go for a walk; besides,
the storm clouds still hung about the horizon, and
gathered here and there, black and thundery. on the rim
of the sky. The whole party spent the rest of the day in the
house.
No more discussions sprang up; on the contrary, after
dinner every one was in the most amiable frame of mind.
At first Katavasov amused the ladies by his original
jokes, which always pleased people on their first
acquaintance with him. Then Sergey Ivanovitch induced
him to tell them about the very interesting observations he
had made on the habits and characteristics of common
houseflies, and their life. Sergey Ivanovitch, too, was in
good spirits, and at tea his brother drew him on to explain
his views of the future of the Eastern question, and he
Anna Karenina
1750 of 1759
spoke so simply and so well, that everyone listened
eagerly.
Kitty was the only one who did not hear it all—she was
summoned to give Mitya his bath.
A few minutes after Kitty had left the room she sent for
Levin to come to the nursery.
Leaving his tea, and regretfully interrupting the
interesting conversation, and at the same time uneasily
wondering why he had been sent for, as this only
happened on important occasions, Levin went to the
nursery.
Although he had been much interested by Sergey
Ivanovitch’s views of the new epoch in history that would
be created by the emancipation of forty millions of men of
Slavonic race acting with Russia, a conception quite new
to him, and although he was disturbed by uneasy wonder
at being sent for by Kitty, as soon as he came out of the
drawing room and was alone, his mind reverted at once to
the thoughts of the morning. And all the theories of the
significance of the Slav element in the history of the world
seemed to him so trivial compared with what was passing
in his own soul, that he instantly forgot it all and dropped
back into the same frame of mind that he been in that
morning.
Anna Karenina
1751 of 1759
He did not, as he had done at other times, recall the
whole train of thought—that he did not need. He fell
back at once into the feeling which had guided him,
which was connected with those thoughts, and he found
that feeling in his soul even stronger and more definite
than before. He did not, as he had had to do with
previous attempts to find comforting arguments, need to
revive a whole chain of thought to find the feeling. Now,
on the contrary, the feeling of joy and peace was keener
than ever, and thought could not keep pace with feeling.
He walked across the terrace and looked at two stars
that had come out in the darkening sky, and suddenly he
remembered. ‘Yes, looking at the sky, I thought that the
dome that I see is not a deception, and then I thought
something, I shirked facing something,’ he mused. ‘But
whatever it was, there can be no disproving it! I have but
to think, and all will come clear!’
Just as he was going into the nursery he remembered
what it was he had shirked facing. It was that if the chief
proof of the Divinity was His revelation of what is right,
how is it this revelation is confined to the Christian
church alone? What relation to this revelation have the
beliefs of the Buddhists, Mohammedans, who preached
and did good too?
Anna Karenina
1752 of 1759
It seemed to him that he had an answer to this
question; but he had not time to formulate it to himself
before he went into the nursery.
Kitty was standing with her sleeves tucked up over the
baby in the bath. Hearing her husband’s footstep, she
turned towards him, summoning him to her with her
smile. With one hand she was supporting the fat baby that
lay floating and sprawling on its back, while with the other
she squeezed the sponge over him.
‘Come, look, look!’ she said, when her husband came
up to her. ‘Agafea Mihalovna’s right. He knows us!’
Mitya had on that day given unmistakable,
incontestable signs of recognizing all his friends.
As soon as Levin approached the bath, the experiment
was tried, and it was completely successful. The cook, sent
for with this object, bent over the baby. He frowned and
shook his head disapprovingly. Kitty bent down to him,
he gave her a beaming smile, propped his little hands on
the sponge and chirruped, making such a queer little
contented sound with his lips, that Kitty and the nurse
were not alone in their admiration. Levin, too, was
surprised and delighted.
Anna Karenina
1753 of 1759
The baby was taken out of the bath, drenched with
water, wrapped in towels, dried, and after a piercing
scream, handed to his mother.
‘Well, I am glad you are beginning to love him,’ said
Kitty to her husband, when she had settled herself
comfortably in her usual place, with the baby at her breast.
‘I am so glad! It had begun to distress me. You said you
had no feeling for him.’
‘No; did I say that? I only said I was disappointed.’
‘What! disappointed in him?’
‘Not disappointed in him, but in my own feeling; I had
expected more. I had expected a rush of new delightful
emotion to come as a surprise. And then instead of that—
disgust, pity..’
She listened attentively, looking at him over the baby,
while she put back on her slender fingers the rings she had
taken off while giving Mitya his bath.
‘And most of all, at there being far more apprehension
and pity than pleasure. Today, after that fright during the
storm, I understand how I love him.’
Kitty’s smile was radiant.
‘Were you very much frightened?’ she said. ‘So was I
too, but I feel it more now that it’s over. I’m going to
look at the oak. How nice Katavasov is! And what a happy
Anna Karenina
1754 of 1759
day we’ve had altogether. And you’re so nice with Sergey
Ivanovitch, when you care to be.... Well, go back to
them. It’s always so hot and steamy here after the bath.’
Anna Karenina
1755 of 1759
Chapter 19
Going out of the nursery and being again alone, Levin
went back at once to the thought, in which there was
something not clear.
Instead of going into the drawing room, where he
heard voices, he stopped on the terrace, and leaning his
elbows on the parapet, he gazed up at the sky.
It was quite dark now, and in the south, where he was
looking, there were no clouds. The storm had drifted on
to the opposite side of the sky, and there were flashes of
lightning and distant thunder from that quarter. Levin
listened to the monotonous drip from the lime trees in the
garden, and looked at the triangle of stars he knew so well,
and the Milky Way with its branches that ran through its
midst. At each flash of lightning the Milky Way, and even
the bright stars, vanished, but as soon as the lightning died
away, they reappeared in their places as though some hand
had flung them back with careful aim.
‘Well, what is it perplexes me?’ Levin said to himself,
feeling beforehand that the solution of his difficulties was
ready in his soul, though he did not know it yet. ‘Yes, the
one unmistakable, incontestable manifestation of the
Anna Karenina
1756 of 1759
Divinity is the law of right and wrong, which has come
into the world by revelation, and which I feel in myself,
and in the recognition of which—I don’t make myself,
but whether I will or not—I am made one with other
men in one body of believers, which is called the church.
Well, but the Jews, the Mohammedans, the Confucians,
the Buddhists—what of them?’ he put to himself the
question he had feared to face. ‘Can these hundreds of
millions of men be deprived of that highest blessing
without which life has no meaning?’ He pondered a
moment, but immediately corrected himself. ‘But what am
I questioning?’ he said to himself. ‘I am questioning the
relation to Divinity of all the different religions of all
mankind. I am questioning the universal manifestation of
God to all the world with all those misty blurs. What am I
about? To me individually, to my heart has been revealed
a knowledge beyond all doubt, and unattainable by reason,
and here I am obstinately trying to express that knowledge
in reason and words.
‘Don’t I know that the stars don’t move?’ he asked
himself, gazing at the bright planet which had shifted its
position up to the topmost twig of the birch-tree. ‘But
looking at the movements of the stars, I can’t picture to
Anna Karenina
1757 of 1759
myself the rotation of the earth, and I’m right in saying
that the stars move.
‘And could the astronomers have understood and
calculated anything, if they had taken into account all the
complicated and varied motions of the earth? All the
marvelous conclusions they have reached about the
distances, weights, movements, and deflections of the
heavenly bodies are only founded on the apparent motions
of the heavenly bodies about a stationary earth, on that
very motion I see before me now, which has been so for
millions of men during long ages, and was and will be
always alike, and can always be trusted. And just as the
conclusions of the astronomers would have been vain and
uncertain if not founded on observations of the seen
heavens, in relation to a single meridian and a single
horizon, so would my conclusions be vain and uncertain if
not founded on that conception of right, which has been
and will be always alike for all men, which has been
revealed to me as a Christian, and which can always be
trusted in my soul. The question of other religions and
their relations to Divinity I have no right to decide, and
no possibility of deciding.’
Anna Karenina
1758 of 1759
‘Oh, you haven’t gone in then?’ he heard Kitty’s voice
all at once, as she came by the same way to the drawingroom.
‘What is it? you’re not worried about anything?’ she
said, looking intently at his face in the starlight.
But she could not have seen his face if a flash of
lightning had not hidden the stars and revealed it. In that
flash she saw his face distinctly, and seeing him calm and
happy, she smiled at him.
‘She understands,’ he thought; ‘she knows what I’m
thinking about. Shall I tell her or not? Yes, I’ll tell her.’
But at the moment he was about to speak, she began
speaking.
‘Kostya! do something for me,’ she said; ‘go into the
corner room and see if they’ve made it all right for Sergey
Ivanovitch. I can’t very well. See if they’ve put the new
wash stand in it.’
‘Very well, I’ll go directly,’ said Levin, standing up and
kissing her.
‘No, I’d better not speak of it,’ he thought, when she
had gone in before him. ‘It is a secret for me alone, of vital
importance for me, and not to be put into words.
‘This new feeling has not changed me, has not made
me happy and enlightened all of a sudden, as I had
Anna Karenina
1759 of 1759
dreamed, just like the feeling for my child. There was no
surprise in this either. Faith—or not faith—I don’t know
what it is—but this feeling has come just as imperceptibly
through suffering, and has taken firm root in my soul.
‘I shall go on in the same way, losing my temper with
Ivan the coachman, falling into angry discussions,
expressing my opinions tactlessly; there will be still the
same wall between the holy of holies of my soul and other
people, even my wife; I shall still go on scolding her for
my own terror, and being remorseful for it; I shall still be
as unable to understand with my reason why I pray, and I
shall still go on praying; but my life now, my whole life
apart from anything that can happen to me, every minute
of it is no more meaningless, as it was before, but it has the
positive meaning of goodness, which I have the power to
put into it.’