BOOK ONE: 1805
CHAPTER I
"Well, Prince, so Genoa and Lucca are now just family estates of the
Buonapartes. But I warn you, if you don't tell me that this means war, if you
still try to defend the infamies and horrors perpetrated by that Antichrist—I
really believe he is Antichrist—I will have nothing more to do with you and
you are no longer my friend, no longer my 'faithful slave,' as you call yourself!
But how do you do? I see I have frightened you—sit down and tell me all the
news."
It was in July, 1805, and the speaker was the well-known Anna Pavlovna
Scherer, maid of honor and favorite of the Empress Marya Fedorovna. With
these words she greeted Prince Vasili Kuragin, a man of high rank and
importance, who was the first to arrive at her reception. Anna Pavlovna had
had a cough for some days. She was, as she said, suffering from la grippe;
grippe being then a new word in St. Petersburg, used only by the elite.
All her invitations without exception, written in French, and delivered by a
scarlet-liveried footman that morning, ran as follows:
"If you have nothing better to do, Count (or Prince), and if the prospect of
spending an evening with a poor invalid is not too terrible, I shall be very
charmed to see you tonight between 7 and 10—Annette Scherer."
"Heavens! what a virulent attack!" replied the prince, not in the least
disconcerted by this reception. He had just entered, wearing an embroidered
court uniform, knee breeches, and shoes, and had stars on his breast and a
serene expression on his flat face. He spoke in that refined French in which
our grandfathers not only spoke but thought, and with the gentle, patronizing
intonation natural to a man of importance who had grown old in society and at
court. He went up to Anna Pavlovna, kissed her hand, presenting to her his
bald, scented, and shining head, and complacently seated himself on the sofa.
"First of all, dear friend, tell me how you are. Set your friend's mind at rest,"
said he without altering his tone, beneath the politeness and affected sympathy
of which indifference and even irony could be discerned.
"Can one be well while suffering morally? Can one be calm in times like these
if one has any feeling?" said Anna Pavlovna. "You are staying the whole
evening, I hope?"
"And the fete at the English ambassador's? Today is Wednesday. I must put in
an appearance there," said the prince. "My daughter is coming for me to take
me there."
"I thought today's fete had been canceled. I confess all these festivities and
fireworks are becoming wearisome."
"If they had known that you wished it, the entertainment would have been put
off," said the prince, who, like a wound-up clock, by force of habit said things
he did not even wish to be believed.
"Don't tease! Well, and what has been decided about Novosiltsev's dispatch?
You know everything."
"What can one say about it?" replied the prince in a cold, listless tone. "What
has been decided? They have decided that Buonaparte has burnt his boats, and
I believe that we are ready to burn ours."
Prince Vasili always spoke languidly, like an actor repeating a stale part. Anna
Pavlovna Scherer on the contrary, despite her forty years, overflowed with
animation and impulsiveness. To be an enthusiast had become her social
vocation and, sometimes even when she did not feel like it, she became
enthusiastic in order not to disappoint the expectations of those who knew her.
The subdued smile which, though it did not suit her faded features, always
played round her lips expressed, as in a spoiled child, a continual
consciousness of her charming defect, which she neither wished, nor could,
nor considered it necessary, to correct.
In the midst of a conversation on political matters Anna Pavlovna burst out:
"Oh, don't speak to me of Austria. Perhaps I don't understand things, but
Austria never has wished, and does not wish, for war. She is betraying us!
Russia alone must save Europe. Our gracious sovereign recognizes his high
vocation and will be true to it. That is the one thing I have faith in! Our good
and wonderful sovereign has to perform the noblest role on earth, and he is so
virtuous and noble that God will not forsake him. He will fulfill his vocation
and crush the hydra of revolution, which has become more terrible than ever in
the person of this murderer and villain! We alone must avenge the blood of the
just one.... Whom, I ask you, can we rely on?... England with her commercial
spirit will not and cannot understand the Emperor Alexander's loftiness of
soul. She has refused to evacuate Malta. She wanted to find, and still seeks,
some secret motive in our actions. What answer did Novosiltsev get? None.
The English have not understood and cannot understand the self-abnegation of
our Emperor who wants nothing for himself, but only desires the good of
mankind. And what have they promised? Nothing! And what little they have
promised they will not perform! Prussia has always declared that Buonaparte
is invincible, and that all Europe is powerless before him.... And I don't
believe a word that Hardenburg says, or Haugwitz either. This famous
Prussian neutrality is just a trap. I have faith only in God and the lofty destiny
of our adored monarch. He will save Europe!"
She suddenly paused, smiling at her own impetuosity.
"I think," said the prince with a smile, "that if you had been sent instead of our
dear Wintzingerode you would have captured the King of Prussia's consent by
assault. You are so eloquent. Will you give me a cup of tea?"
"In a moment. A propos," she added, becoming calm again, "I am expecting
two very interesting men tonight, le Vicomte de Mortemart, who is connected
with the Montmorencys through the Rohans, one of the best French families.
He is one of the genuine emigres, the good ones. And also the Abbe Morio.
Do you know that profound thinker? He has been received by the Emperor.
Had you heard?"
"I shall be delighted to meet them," said the prince. "But tell me," he added
with studied carelessness as if it had only just occurred to him, though the
question he was about to ask was the chief motive of his visit, "is it true that
the Dowager Empress wants Baron Funke to be appointed first secretary at
Vienna? The baron by all accounts is a poor creature."
Prince Vasili wished to obtain this post for his son, but others were trying
through the Dowager Empress Marya Fedorovna to secure it for the baron.
Anna Pavlovna almost closed her eyes to indicate that neither she nor anyone
else had a right to criticize what the Empress desired or was pleased with.
"Baron Funke has been recommended to the Dowager Empress by her sister,"
was all she said, in a dry and mournful tone.
As she named the Empress, Anna Pavlovna's face suddenly assumed an
expression of profound and sincere devotion and respect mingled with
sadness, and this occurred every time she mentioned her illustrious patroness.
She added that Her Majesty had deigned to show Baron Funke beaucoup
d'estime, and again her face clouded over with sadness.
The prince was silent and looked indifferent. But, with the womanly and
courtierlike quickness and tact habitual to her, Anna Pavlovna wished both to
rebuke him (for daring to speak as he had done of a man recommended to the
Empress) and at the same time to console him, so she said:
"Now about your family. Do you know that since your daughter came out
everyone has been enraptured by her? They say she is amazingly beautiful."
The prince bowed to signify his respect and gratitude.
"I often think," she continued after a short pause, drawing nearer to the prince
and smiling amiably at him as if to show that political and social topics were
ended and the time had come for intimate conversation—"I often think how
unfairly sometimes the joys of life are distributed. Why has fate given you two
such splendid children? I don't speak of Anatole, your youngest. I don't like
him," she added in a tone admitting of no rejoinder and raising her eyebrows.
"Two such charming children. And really you appreciate them less than
anyone, and so you don't deserve to have them."
And she smiled her ecstatic smile.
"I can't help it," said the prince. "Lavater would have said I lack the bump of
paternity."
"Don't joke; I mean to have a serious talk with you. Do you know I am
dissatisfied with your younger son? Between ourselves" (and her face assumed
its melancholy expression), "he was mentioned at Her Majesty's and you were
pitied...."
The prince answered nothing, but she looked at him significantly, awaiting a
reply. He frowned.
"What would you have me do?" he said at last. "You know I did all a father
could for their education, and they have both turned out fools. Hippolyte is at
least a quiet fool, but Anatole is an active one. That is the only difference
between them." He said this smiling in a way more natural and animated than
usual, so that the wrinkles round his mouth very clearly revealed something
unexpectedly coarse and unpleasant.
"And why are children born to such men as you? If you were not a father there
would be nothing I could reproach you with," said Anna Pavlovna, looking up
pensively.
"I am your faithful slave and to you alone I can confess that my children are
the bane of my life. It is the cross I have to bear. That is how I explain it to
myself. It can't be helped!"
He said no more, but expressed his resignation to cruel fate by a gesture. Anna
Pavlovna meditated.
"Have you never thought of marrying your prodigal son Anatole?" she asked.
"They say old maids have a mania for matchmaking, and though I don't feel
that weakness in myself as yet, I know a little person who is very unhappy
with her father. She is a relation of yours, Princess Mary Bolkonskaya."
Prince Vasili did not reply, though, with the quickness of memory and
perception befitting a man of the world, he indicated by a movement of the
head that he was considering this information.
"Do you know," he said at last, evidently unable to check the sad current of his
thoughts, "that Anatole is costing me forty thousand rubles a year? And," he
went on after a pause, "what will it be in five years, if he goes on like this?"
Presently he added: "That's what we fathers have to put up with.... Is this
princess of yours rich?"
"Her father is very rich and stingy. He lives in the country. He is the wellknown Prince Bolkonski who had to retire from the army under the late
Emperor, and was nicknamed 'the King of Prussia.' He is very clever but
eccentric, and a bore. The poor girl is very unhappy. She has a brother; I think
you know him, he married Lise Meinen lately. He is an aide-de-camp of
Kutuzov's and will be here tonight."
"Listen, dear Annette," said the prince, suddenly taking Anna Pavlovna's hand
and for some reason drawing it downwards. "Arrange that affair for me and I
shall always be your most devoted slave-slafe with an f, as a village elder of
mine writes in his reports. She is rich and of good family and that's all I want."
And with the familiarity and easy grace peculiar to him, he raised the maid of
honor's hand to his lips, kissed it, and swung it to and fro as he lay back in his
armchair, looking in another direction.
"Attendez," said Anna Pavlovna, reflecting, "I'll speak to Lise, young
Bolkonski's wife, this very evening, and perhaps the thing can be arranged. It
shall be on your family's behalf that I'll start my apprenticeship as old maid."
CHAPTER II
Anna Pavlovna's drawing room was gradually filling. The highest Petersburg
society was assembled there: people differing widely in age and character but
alike in the social circle to which they belonged. Prince Vasili's daughter, the
beautiful Helene, came to take her father to the ambassador's entertainment;
she wore a ball dress and her badge as maid of honor. The youthful little
Princess Bolkonskaya, known as la femme la plus seduisante de Petersbourg,
* was also there. She had been married during the previous winter, and being
pregnant did not go to any large gatherings, but only to small receptions.
Prince Vasili's son, Hippolyte, had come with Mortemart, whom he
introduced. The Abbe Morio and many others had also come.
* The most fascinating woman in Petersburg.
To each new arrival Anna Pavlovna said, "You have not yet seen my aunt," or
"You do not know my aunt?" and very gravely conducted him or her to a little
old lady, wearing large bows of ribbon in her cap, who had come sailing in
from another room as soon as the guests began to arrive; and slowly turning
her eyes from the visitor to her aunt, Anna Pavlovna mentioned each one's
name and then left them.
Each visitor performed the ceremony of greeting this old aunt whom not one
of them knew, not one of them wanted to know, and not one of them cared
about; Anna Pavlovna observed these greetings with mournful and solemn
interest and silent approval. The aunt spoke to each of them in the same words,
about their health and her own, and the health of Her Majesty, "who, thank
God, was better today." And each visitor, though politeness prevented his
showing impatience, left the old woman with a sense of relief at having
performed a vexatious duty and did not return to her the whole evening.
The young Princess Bolkonskaya had brought some work in a goldembroidered velvet bag. Her pretty little upper lip, on which a delicate dark
down was just perceptible, was too short for her teeth, but it lifted all the more
sweetly, and was especially charming when she occasionally drew it down to
meet the lower lip. As is always the case with a thoroughly attractive woman,
her defect—the shortness of her upper lip and her half-open mouth—seemed
to be her own special and peculiar form of beauty. Everyone brightened at the
sight of this pretty young woman, so soon to become a mother, so full of life
and health, and carrying her burden so lightly. Old men and dull dispirited
young ones who looked at her, after being in her company and talking to her a
little while, felt as if they too were becoming, like her, full of life and health.
All who talked to her, and at each word saw her bright smile and the constant
gleam of her white teeth, thought that they were in a specially amiable mood
that day.
The little princess went round the table with quick, short, swaying steps, her
workbag on her arm, and gaily spreading out her dress sat down on a sofa near
the silver samovar, as if all she was doing was a pleasure to herself and to all
around her. "I have brought my work," said she in French, displaying her bag
and addressing all present. "Mind, Annette, I hope you have not played a
wicked trick on me," she added, turning to her hostess. "You wrote that it was
to be quite a small reception, and just see how badly I am dressed." And she
spread out her arms to show her short-waisted, lace-trimmed, dainty gray
dress, girdled with a broad ribbon just below the breast.
"Soyez tranquille, Lise, you will always be prettier than anyone else," replied
Anna Pavlovna.
"You know," said the princess in the same tone of voice and still in French,
turning to a general, "my husband is deserting me? He is going to get himself
killed. Tell me what this wretched war is for?" she added, addressing Prince
Vasili, and without waiting for an answer she turned to speak to his daughter,
the beautiful Helene.
"What a delightful woman this little princess is!" said Prince Vasili to Anna
Pavlovna.
One of the next arrivals was a stout, heavily built young man with closecropped hair, spectacles, the light-colored breeches fashionable at that time, a
very high ruffle, and a brown dress coat. This stout young man was an
illegitimate son of Count Bezukhov, a well-known grandee of Catherine's time
who now lay dying in Moscow. The young man had not yet entered either the
military or civil service, as he had only just returned from abroad where he
had been educated, and this was his first appearance in society. Anna Pavlovna
greeted him with the nod she accorded to the lowest hierarchy in her drawing
room. But in spite of this lowest-grade greeting, a look of anxiety and fear, as
at the sight of something too large and unsuited to the place, came over her
face when she saw Pierre enter. Though he was certainly rather bigger than the
other men in the room, her anxiety could only have reference to the clever
though shy, but observant and natural, expression which distinguished him
from everyone else in that drawing room.
"It is very good of you, Monsieur Pierre, to come and visit a poor invalid,"
said Anna Pavlovna, exchanging an alarmed glance with her aunt as she
conducted him to her.
Pierre murmured something unintelligible, and continued to look round as if in
search of something. On his way to the aunt he bowed to the little princess
with a pleased smile, as to an intimate acquaintance.
Anna Pavlovna's alarm was justified, for Pierre turned away from the aunt
without waiting to hear her speech about Her Majesty's health. Anna Pavlovna
in dismay detained him with the words: "Do you know the Abbe Morio? He is
a most interesting man."
"Yes, I have heard of his scheme for perpetual peace, and it is very interesting
but hardly feasible."
"You think so?" rejoined Anna Pavlovna in order to say something and get
away to attend to her duties as hostess. But Pierre now committed a reverse act
of impoliteness. First he had left a lady before she had finished speaking to
him, and now he continued to speak to another who wished to get away. With
his head bent, and his big feet spread apart, he began explaining his reasons
for thinking the abbe's plan chimerical.
"We will talk of it later," said Anna Pavlovna with a smile.
And having got rid of this young man who did not know how to behave, she
resumed her duties as hostess and continued to listen and watch, ready to help
at any point where the conversation might happen to flag. As the foreman of a
spinning mill, when he has set the hands to work, goes round and notices here
a spindle that has stopped or there one that creaks or makes more noise than it
should, and hastens to check the machine or set it in proper motion, so Anna
Pavlovna moved about her drawing room, approaching now a silent, now a
too-noisy group, and by a word or slight rearrangement kept the
conversational machine in steady, proper, and regular motion. But amid these
cares her anxiety about Pierre was evident. She kept an anxious watch on him
when he approached the group round Mortemart to listen to what was being
said there, and again when he passed to another group whose center was the
abbe.
Pierre had been educated abroad, and this reception at Anna Pavlovna's was
the first he had attended in Russia. He knew that all the intellectual lights of
Petersburg were gathered there and, like a child in a toyshop, did not know
which way to look, afraid of missing any clever conversation that was to be
heard. Seeing the self-confident and refined expression on the faces of those
present he was always expecting to hear something very profound. At last he
came up to Morio. Here the conversation seemed interesting and he stood
waiting for an opportunity to express his own views, as young people are fond
of doing.
CHAPTER III
Anna Pavlovna's reception was in full swing. The spindles hummed steadily
and ceaselessly on all sides. With the exception of the aunt, beside whom sat
only one elderly lady, who with her thin careworn face was rather out of place
in this brilliant society, the whole company had settled into three groups. One,
chiefly masculine, had formed round the abbe. Another, of young people, was
grouped round the beautiful Princess Helene, Prince Vasili's daughter, and the
little Princess Bolkonskaya, very pretty and rosy, though rather too plump for
her age. The third group was gathered round Mortemart and Anna Pavlovna.
The vicomte was a nice-looking young man with soft features and polished
manners, who evidently considered himself a celebrity but out of politeness
modestly placed himself at the disposal of the circle in which he found
himself. Anna Pavlovna was obviously serving him up as a treat to her guests.
As a clever maitre d'hotel serves up as a specially choice delicacy a piece of
meat that no one who had seen it in the kitchen would have cared to eat, so
Anna Pavlovna served up to her guests, first the vicomte and then the abbe, as
peculiarly choice morsels. The group about Mortemart immediately began
discussing the murder of the Duc d'Enghien. The vicomte said that the Duc
d'Enghien had perished by his own magnanimity, and that there were
particular reasons for Buonaparte's hatred of him.
"Ah, yes! Do tell us all about it, Vicomte," said Anna Pavlovna, with a
pleasant feeling that there was something a la Louis XV in the sound of that
sentence: "Contez nous cela, Vicomte."
The vicomte bowed and smiled courteously in token of his willingness to
comply. Anna Pavlovna arranged a group round him, inviting everyone to
listen to his tale.
"The vicomte knew the duc personally," whispered Anna Pavlovna to one of
the guests. "The vicomte is a wonderful raconteur," said she to another. "How
evidently he belongs to the best society," said she to a third; and the vicomte
was served up to the company in the choicest and most advantageous style,
like a well-garnished joint of roast beef on a hot dish.
The vicomte wished to begin his story and gave a subtle smile.
"Come over here, Helene, dear," said Anna Pavlovna to the beautiful young
princess who was sitting some way off, the center of another group.
The princess smiled. She rose with the same unchanging smile with which she
had first entered the room—the smile of a perfectly beautiful woman. With a
slight rustle of her white dress trimmed with moss and ivy, with a gleam of
white shoulders, glossy hair, and sparkling diamonds, she passed between the
men who made way for her, not looking at any of them but smiling on all, as if
graciously allowing each the privilege of admiring her beautiful figure and
shapely shoulders, back, and bosom—which in the fashion of those days were
very much exposed—and she seemed to bring the glamour of a ballroom with
her as she moved toward Anna Pavlovna. Helene was so lovely that not only
did she not show any trace of coquetry, but on the contrary she even appeared
shy of her unquestionable and all too victorious beauty. She seemed to wish,
but to be unable, to diminish its effect.
"How lovely!" said everyone who saw her; and the vicomte lifted his
shoulders and dropped his eyes as if startled by something extraordinary when
she took her seat opposite and beamed upon him also with her unchanging
smile.
"Madame, I doubt my ability before such an audience," said he, smilingly
inclining his head.
The princess rested her bare round arm on a little table and considered a reply
unnecessary. She smilingly waited. All the time the story was being told she
sat upright, glancing now at her beautiful round arm, altered in shape by its
pressure on the table, now at her still more beautiful bosom, on which she
readjusted a diamond necklace. From time to time she smoothed the folds of
her dress, and whenever the story produced an effect she glanced at Anna
Pavlovna, at once adopted just the expression she saw on the maid of honor's
face, and again relapsed into her radiant smile.
The little princess had also left the tea table and followed Helene.
"Wait a moment, I'll get my work.... Now then, what are you thinking of?" she
went on, turning to Prince Hippolyte. "Fetch me my workbag."
There was a general movement as the princess, smiling and talking merrily to
everyone at once, sat down and gaily arranged herself in her seat.
"Now I am all right," she said, and asking the vicomte to begin, she took up
her work.
Prince Hippolyte, having brought the workbag, joined the circle and moving a
chair close to hers seated himself beside her.
Le charmant Hippolyte was surprising by his extraordinary resemblance to his
beautiful sister, but yet more by the fact that in spite of this resemblance he
was exceedingly ugly. His features were like his sister's, but while in her case
everything was lit up by a joyous, self-satisfied, youthful, and constant smile
of animation, and by the wonderful classic beauty of her figure, his face on the
contrary was dulled by imbecility and a constant expression of sullen selfconfidence, while his body was thin and weak. His eyes, nose, and mouth all
seemed puckered into a vacant, wearied grimace, and his arms and legs always
fell into unnatural positions.
"It's not going to be a ghost story?" said he, sitting down beside the princess
and hastily adjusting his lorgnette, as if without this instrument he could not
begin to speak.
"Why no, my dear fellow," said the astonished narrator, shrugging his
shoulders.
"Because I hate ghost stories," said Prince Hippolyte in a tone which showed
that he only understood the meaning of his words after he had uttered them.
He spoke with such self-confidence that his hearers could not be sure whether
what he said was very witty or very stupid. He was dressed in a dark-green
dress coat, knee breeches of the color of cuisse de nymphe effrayee, as he
called it, shoes, and silk stockings.
The vicomte told his tale very neatly. It was an anecdote, then current, to the
effect that the Duc d'Enghien had gone secretly to Paris to visit Mademoiselle
George; that at her house he came upon Bonaparte, who also enjoyed the
famous actress' favors, and that in his presence Napoleon happened to fall into
one of the fainting fits to which he was subject, and was thus at the duc's
mercy. The latter spared him, and this magnanimity Bonaparte subsequently
repaid by death.
The story was very pretty and interesting, especially at the point where the
rivals suddenly recognized one another; and the ladies looked agitated.
"Charming!" said Anna Pavlovna with an inquiring glance at the little
princess.
"Charming!" whispered the little princess, sticking the needle into her work as
if to testify that the interest and fascination of the story prevented her from
going on with it.
The vicomte appreciated this silent praise and smiling gratefully prepared to
continue, but just then Anna Pavlovna, who had kept a watchful eye on the
young man who so alarmed her, noticed that he was talking too loudly and
vehemently with the abbe, so she hurried to the rescue. Pierre had managed to
start a conversation with the abbe about the balance of power, and the latter,
evidently interested by the young man's simple-minded eagerness, was
explaining his pet theory. Both were talking and listening too eagerly and too
naturally, which was why Anna Pavlovna disapproved.
"The means are... the balance of power in Europe and the rights of the people,"
the abbe was saying. "It is only necessary for one powerful nation like Russia
—barbaric as she is said to be—to place herself disinterestedly at the head of
an alliance having for its object the maintenance of the balance of power of
Europe, and it would save the world!"
"But how are you to get that balance?" Pierre was beginning.
At that moment Anna Pavlovna came up and, looking severely at Pierre, asked
the Italian how he stood Russian climate. The Italian's face instantly changed
and assumed an offensively affected, sugary expression, evidently habitual to
him when conversing with women.
"I am so enchanted by the brilliancy of the wit and culture of the society, more
especially of the feminine society, in which I have had the honor of being
received, that I have not yet had time to think of the climate," said he.
Not letting the abbe and Pierre escape, Anna Pavlovna, the more conveniently
to keep them under observation, brought them into the larger circle.
CHAPTER IV
Just then another visitor entered the drawing room: Prince Andrew Bolkonski,
the little princess' husband. He was a very handsome young man, of medium
height, with firm, clearcut features. Everything about him, from his weary,
bored expression to his quiet, measured step, offered a most striking contrast
to his quiet, little wife. It was evident that he not only knew everyone in the
drawing room, but had found them to be so tiresome that it wearied him to
look at or listen to them. And among all these faces that he found so tedious,
none seemed to bore him so much as that of his pretty wife. He turned away
from her with a grimace that distorted his handsome face, kissed Anna
Pavlovna's hand, and screwing up his eyes scanned the whole company.
"You are off to the war, Prince?" said Anna Pavlovna.
"General Kutuzov," said Bolkonski, speaking French and stressing the last
syllable of the general's name like a Frenchman, "has been pleased to take me
as an aide-de-camp...."
"And Lise, your wife?"
"She will go to the country."
"Are you not ashamed to deprive us of your charming wife?"
"Andre," said his wife, addressing her husband in the same coquettish manner
in which she spoke to other men, "the vicomte has been telling us such a tale
about Mademoiselle George and Buonaparte!"
Prince Andrew screwed up his eyes and turned away. Pierre, who from the
moment Prince Andrew entered the room had watched him with glad,
affectionate eyes, now came up and took his arm. Before he looked round
Prince Andrew frowned again, expressing his annoyance with whoever was
touching his arm, but when he saw Pierre's beaming face he gave him an
unexpectedly kind and pleasant smile.
"There now!... So you, too, are in the great world?" said he to Pierre.
"I knew you would be here," replied Pierre. "I will come to supper with you.
May I?" he added in a low voice so as not to disturb the vicomte who was
continuing his story.
"No, impossible!" said Prince Andrew, laughing and pressing Pierre's hand to
show that there was no need to ask the question. He wished to say something
more, but at that moment Prince Vasili and his daughter got up to go and the
two young men rose to let them pass.
"You must excuse me, dear Vicomte," said Prince Vasili to the Frenchman,
holding him down by the sleeve in a friendly way to prevent his rising. "This
unfortunate fete at the ambassador's deprives me of a pleasure, and obliges me
to interrupt you. I am very sorry to leave your enchanting party," said he,
turning to Anna Pavlovna.
His daughter, Princess Helene, passed between the chairs, lightly holding up
the folds of her dress, and the smile shone still more radiantly on her beautiful
face. Pierre gazed at her with rapturous, almost frightened, eyes as she passed
him.
"Very lovely," said Prince Andrew.
"Very," said Pierre.
In passing Prince Vasili seized Pierre's hand and said to Anna Pavlovna:
"Educate this bear for me! He has been staying with me a whole month and
this is the first time I have seen him in society. Nothing is so necessary for a
young man as the society of clever women."
Anna Pavlovna smiled and promised to take Pierre in hand. She knew his
father to be a connection of Prince Vasili's. The elderly lady who had been
sitting with the old aunt rose hurriedly and overtook Prince Vasili in the
anteroom. All the affectation of interest she had assumed had left her kindly
and tear-worn face and it now expressed only anxiety and fear.
"How about my son Boris, Prince?" said she, hurrying after him into the
anteroom. "I can't remain any longer in Petersburg. Tell me what news I may
take back to my poor boy."
Although Prince Vasili listened reluctantly and not very politely to the elderly
lady, even betraying some impatience, she gave him an ingratiating and
appealing smile, and took his hand that he might not go away.
"What would it cost you to say a word to the Emperor, and then he would be
transferred to the Guards at once?" said she.
"Believe me, Princess, I am ready to do all I can," answered Prince Vasili, "but
it is difficult for me to ask the Emperor. I should advise you to appeal to
Rumyantsev through Prince Golitsyn. That would be the best way."
The elderly lady was a Princess Drubetskaya, belonging to one of the best
families in Russia, but she was poor, and having long been out of society had
lost her former influential connections. She had now come to Petersburg to
procure an appointment in the Guards for her only son. It was, in fact, solely to
meet Prince Vasili that she had obtained an invitation to Anna Pavlovna's
reception and had sat listening to the vicomte's story. Prince Vasili's words
frightened her, an embittered look clouded her once handsome face, but only
for a moment; then she smiled again and clutched Prince Vasili's arm more
tightly.
"Listen to me, Prince," said she. "I have never yet asked you for anything and I
never will again, nor have I ever reminded you of my father's friendship for
you; but now I entreat you for God's sake to do this for my son—and I shall
always regard you as a benefactor," she added hurriedly. "No, don't be angry,
but promise! I have asked Golitsyn and he has refused. Be the kindhearted
man you always were," she said, trying to smile though tears were in her eyes.
"Papa, we shall be late," said Princess Helene, turning her beautiful head and
looking over her classically molded shoulder as she stood waiting by the door.
Influence in society, however, is a capital which has to be economized if it is
to last. Prince Vasili knew this, and having once realized that if he asked on
behalf of all who begged of him, he would soon be unable to ask for himself,
he became chary of using his influence. But in Princess Drubetskaya's case he
felt, after her second appeal, something like qualms of conscience. She had
reminded him of what was quite true; he had been indebted to her father for
the first steps in his career. Moreover, he could see by her manners that she
was one of those women—mostly mothers—who, having once made up their
minds, will not rest until they have gained their end, and are prepared if
necessary to go on insisting day after day and hour after hour, and even to
make scenes. This last consideration moved him.
"My dear Anna Mikhaylovna," said he with his usual familiarity and
weariness of tone, "it is almost impossible for me to do what you ask; but to
prove my devotion to you and how I respect your father's memory, I will do
the impossible—your son shall be transferred to the Guards. Here is my hand
on it. Are you satisfied?"
"My dear benefactor! This is what I expected from you—I knew your
kindness!" He turned to go.
"Wait—just a word! When he has been transferred to the Guards..." she
faltered. "You are on good terms with Michael Ilarionovich Kutuzov...
recommend Boris to him as adjutant! Then I shall be at rest, and then..."
Prince Vasili smiled.
"No, I won't promise that. You don't know how Kutuzov is pestered since his
appointment as Commander in Chief. He told me himself that all the Moscow
ladies have conspired to give him all their sons as adjutants."
"No, but do promise! I won't let you go! My dear benefactor..."
"Papa," said his beautiful daughter in the same tone as before, "we shall be
late."
"Well, au revoir! Good-bye! You hear her?"
"Then tomorrow you will speak to the Emperor?"
"Certainly; but about Kutuzov, I don't promise."
"Do promise, do promise, Vasili!" cried Anna Mikhaylovna as he went, with
the smile of a coquettish girl, which at one time probably came naturally to
her, but was now very ill-suited to her careworn face.
Apparently she had forgotten her age and by force of habit employed all the
old feminine arts. But as soon as the prince had gone her face resumed its
former cold, artificial expression. She returned to the group where the vicomte
was still talking, and again pretended to listen, while waiting till it would be
time to leave. Her task was accomplished.
CHAPTER V
"And what do you think of this latest comedy, the coronation at Milan?" asked
Anna Pavlovna, "and of the comedy of the people of Genoa and Lucca laying
their petitions before Monsieur Buonaparte, and Monsieur Buonaparte sitting
on a throne and granting the petitions of the nations? Adorable! It is enough to
make one's head whirl! It is as if the whole world had gone crazy."
Prince Andrew looked Anna Pavlovna straight in the face with a sarcastic
smile.
"'Dieu me la donne, gare a qui la touche!' * They say he was very fine when he
said that," he remarked, repeating the words in Italian: "'Dio mi l'ha dato. Guai
a chi la tocchi!'"
* God has given it to me, let him who touches it beware!
"I hope this will prove the last drop that will make the glass run over," Anna
Pavlovna continued. "The sovereigns will not be able to endure this man who
is a menace to everything."
"The sovereigns? I do not speak of Russia," said the vicomte, polite but
hopeless: "The sovereigns, madame... What have they done for Louis XVII,
for the Queen, or for Madame Elizabeth? Nothing!" and he became more
animated. "And believe me, they are reaping the reward of their betrayal of the
Bourbon cause. The sovereigns! Why, they are sending ambassadors to
compliment the usurper."
And sighing disdainfully, he again changed his position.
Prince Hippolyte, who had been gazing at the vicomte for some time through
his lorgnette, suddenly turned completely round toward the little princess, and
having asked for a needle began tracing the Conde coat of arms on the table.
He explained this to her with as much gravity as if she had asked him to do it.
"Baton de gueules, engrele de gueules d'azur—maison Conde," said he.
The princess listened, smiling.
"If Buonaparte remains on the throne of France a year longer," the vicomte
continued, with the air of a man who, in a matter with which he is better
acquainted than anyone else, does not listen to others but follows the current
of his own thoughts, "things will have gone too far. By intrigues, violence,
exile, and executions, French society—I mean good French society—will have
been forever destroyed, and then..."
He shrugged his shoulders and spread out his hands. Pierre wished to make a
remark, for the conversation interested him, but Anna Pavlovna, who had him
under observation, interrupted:
"The Emperor Alexander," said she, with the melancholy which always
accompanied any reference of hers to the Imperial family, "has declared that
he will leave it to the French people themselves to choose their own form of
government; and I believe that once free from the usurper, the whole nation
will certainly throw itself into the arms of its rightful king," she concluded,
trying to be amiable to the royalist emigrant.
"That is doubtful," said Prince Andrew. "Monsieur le Vicomte quite rightly
supposes that matters have already gone too far. I think it will be difficult to
return to the old regime."
"From what I have heard," said Pierre, blushing and breaking into the
conversation, "almost all the aristocracy has already gone over to Bonaparte's
side."
"It is the Buonapartists who say that," replied the vicomte without looking at
Pierre. "At the present time it is difficult to know the real state of French
public opinion."
"Bonaparte has said so," remarked Prince Andrew with a sarcastic smile.
It was evident that he did not like the vicomte and was aiming his remarks at
him, though without looking at him.
"'I showed them the path to glory, but they did not follow it,'" Prince Andrew
continued after a short silence, again quoting Napoleon's words. "'I opened my
antechambers and they crowded in.' I do not know how far he was justified in
saying so."
"Not in the least," replied the vicomte. "After the murder of the duc even the
most partial ceased to regard him as a hero. If to some people," he went on,
turning to Anna Pavlovna, "he ever was a hero, after the murder of the duc
there was one martyr more in heaven and one hero less on earth."
Before Anna Pavlovna and the others had time to smile their appreciation of
the vicomte's epigram, Pierre again broke into the conversation, and though
Anna Pavlovna felt sure he would say something inappropriate, she was
unable to stop him.
"The execution of the Duc d'Enghien," declared Monsieur Pierre, "was a
political necessity, and it seems to me that Napoleon showed greatness of soul
by not fearing to take on himself the whole responsibility of that deed."
"Dieu! Mon Dieu!" muttered Anna Pavlovna in a terrified whisper.
"What, Monsieur Pierre... Do you consider that assassination shows greatness
of soul?" said the little princess, smiling and drawing her work nearer to her.
"Oh! Oh!" exclaimed several voices.
"Capital!" said Prince Hippolyte in English, and began slapping his knee with
the palm of his hand.
The vicomte merely shrugged his shoulders. Pierre looked solemnly at his
audience over his spectacles and continued.
"I say so," he continued desperately, "because the Bourbons fled from the
Revolution leaving the people to anarchy, and Napoleon alone understood the
Revolution and quelled it, and so for the general good, he could not stop short
for the sake of one man's life."
"Won't you come over to the other table?" suggested Anna Pavlovna.
But Pierre continued his speech without heeding her.
"No," cried he, becoming more and more eager, "Napoleon is great because he
rose superior to the Revolution, suppressed its abuses, preserved all that was
good in it—equality of citizenship and freedom of speech and of the press—
and only for that reason did he obtain power."
"Yes, if having obtained power, without availing himself of it to commit
murder he had restored it to the rightful king, I should have called him a great
man," remarked the vicomte.
"He could not do that. The people only gave him power that he might rid them
of the Bourbons and because they saw that he was a great man. The
Revolution was a grand thing!" continued Monsieur Pierre, betraying by this
desperate and provocative proposition his extreme youth and his wish to
express all that was in his mind.
"What? Revolution and regicide a grand thing?... Well, after that... But won't
you come to this other table?" repeated Anna Pavlovna.
"Rousseau's Contrat Social," said the vicomte with a tolerant smile.
"I am not speaking of regicide, I am speaking about ideas."
"Yes: ideas of robbery, murder, and regicide," again interjected an ironical
voice.
"Those were extremes, no doubt, but they are not what is most important.
What is important are the rights of man, emancipation from prejudices, and
equality of citizenship, and all these ideas Napoleon has retained in full force."
"Liberty and equality," said the vicomte contemptuously, as if at last deciding
seriously to prove to this youth how foolish his words were, "high-sounding
words which have long been discredited. Who does not love liberty and
equality? Even our Saviour preached liberty and equality. Have people since
the Revolution become happier? On the contrary. We wanted liberty, but
Buonaparte has destroyed it."
Prince Andrew kept looking with an amused smile from Pierre to the vicomte
and from the vicomte to their hostess. In the first moment of Pierre's outburst
Anna Pavlovna, despite her social experience, was horror-struck. But when
she saw that Pierre's sacrilegious words had not exasperated the vicomte, and
had convinced herself that it was impossible to stop him, she rallied her forces
and joined the vicomte in a vigorous attack on the orator.
"But, my dear Monsieur Pierre," said she, "how do you explain the fact of a
great man executing a duc—or even an ordinary man who—is innocent and
untried?"
"I should like," said the vicomte, "to ask how monsieur explains the 18th
Brumaire; was not that an imposture? It was a swindle, and not at all like the
conduct of a great man!"
"And the prisoners he killed in Africa? That was horrible!" said the little
princess, shrugging her shoulders.
"He's a low fellow, say what you will," remarked Prince Hippolyte.
Pierre, not knowing whom to answer, looked at them all and smiled. His smile
was unlike the half-smile of other people. When he smiled, his grave, even
rather gloomy, look was instantaneously replaced by another—a childlike,
kindly, even rather silly look, which seemed to ask forgiveness.
The vicomte who was meeting him for the first time saw clearly that this
young Jacobin was not so terrible as his words suggested. All were silent.
"How do you expect him to answer you all at once?" said Prince Andrew.
"Besides, in the actions of a statesman one has to distinguish between his acts
as a private person, as a general, and as an emperor. So it seems to me."
"Yes, yes, of course!" Pierre chimed in, pleased at the arrival of this
reinforcement.
"One must admit," continued Prince Andrew, "that Napoleon as a man was
great on the bridge of Arcola, and in the hospital at Jaffa where he gave his
hand to the plague-stricken; but... but there are other acts which it is difficult
to justify."
Prince Andrew, who had evidently wished to tone down the awkwardness of
Pierre's remarks, rose and made a sign to his wife that it was time to go.
Suddenly Prince Hippolyte started up making signs to everyone to attend, and
asking them all to be seated began:
"I was told a charming Moscow story today and must treat you to it. Excuse
me, Vicomte—I must tell it in Russian or the point will be lost...." And Prince
Hippolyte began to tell his story in such Russian as a Frenchman would speak
after spending about a year in Russia. Everyone waited, so emphatically and
eagerly did he demand their attention to his story.
"There is in Moscow a lady, une dame, and she is very stingy. She must have
two footmen behind her carriage, and very big ones. That was her taste. And
she had a lady's maid, also big. She said..."
Here Prince Hippolyte paused, evidently collecting his ideas with difficulty.
"She said... Oh yes! She said, 'Girl,' to the maid, 'put on a livery, get up behind
the carriage, and come with me while I make some calls.'"
Here Prince Hippolyte spluttered and burst out laughing long before his
audience, which produced an effect unfavorable to the narrator. Several
persons, among them the elderly lady and Anna Pavlovna, did however smile.
"She went. Suddenly there was a great wind. The girl lost her hat and her long
hair came down...." Here he could contain himself no longer and went on,
between gasps of laughter: "And the whole world knew...."
And so the anecdote ended. Though it was unintelligible why he had told it, or
why it had to be told in Russian, still Anna Pavlovna and the others
appreciated Prince Hippolyte's social tact in so agreeably ending Pierre's
unpleasant and unamiable outburst. After the anecdote the conversation broke
up into insignificant small talk about the last and next balls, about theatricals,
and who would meet whom, and when and where.
CHAPTER VI
Having thanked Anna Pavlovna for her charming soiree, the guests began to
take their leave.
Pierre was ungainly. Stout, about the average height, broad, with huge red
hands; he did not know, as the saying is, how to enter a drawing room and still
less how to leave one; that is, how to say something particularly agreeable
before going away. Besides this he was absent-minded. When he rose to go, he
took up instead of his own, the general's three-cornered hat, and held it,
pulling at the plume, till the general asked him to restore it. All his absentmindedness and inability to enter a room and converse in it was, however,
redeemed by his kindly, simple, and modest expression. Anna Pavlovna turned
toward him and, with a Christian mildness that expressed forgiveness of his
indiscretion, nodded and said: "I hope to see you again, but I also hope you
will change your opinions, my dear Monsieur Pierre."
When she said this, he did not reply and only bowed, but again everybody saw
his smile, which said nothing, unless perhaps, "Opinions are opinions, but you
see what a capital, good-natured fellow I am." And everyone, including Anna
Pavlovna, felt this.
Prince Andrew had gone out into the hall, and, turning his shoulders to the
footman who was helping him on with his cloak, listened indifferently to his
wife's chatter with Prince Hippolyte who had also come into the hall. Prince
Hippolyte stood close to the pretty, pregnant princess, and stared fixedly at her
through his eyeglass.
"Go in, Annette, or you will catch cold," said the little princess, taking leave of
Anna Pavlovna. "It is settled," she added in a low voice.
Anna Pavlovna had already managed to speak to Lise about the match she
contemplated between Anatole and the little princess' sister-in-law.
"I rely on you, my dear," said Anna Pavlovna, also in a low tone. "Write to her
and let me know how her father looks at the matter. Au revoir!"—and she left
the hall.
Prince Hippolyte approached the little princess and, bending his face close to
her, began to whisper something.
Two footmen, the princess' and his own, stood holding a shawl and a cloak,
waiting for the conversation to finish. They listened to the French sentences
which to them were meaningless, with an air of understanding but not wishing
to appear to do so. The princess as usual spoke smilingly and listened with a
laugh.
"I am very glad I did not go to the ambassador's," said Prince Hippolyte "-so
dull-. It has been a delightful evening, has it not? Delightful!"
"They say the ball will be very good," replied the princess, drawing up her
downy little lip. "All the pretty women in society will be there."
"Not all, for you will not be there; not all," said Prince Hippolyte smiling
joyfully; and snatching the shawl from the footman, whom he even pushed
aside, he began wrapping it round the princess. Either from awkwardness or
intentionally (no one could have said which) after the shawl had been adjusted
he kept his arm around her for a long time, as though embracing her.
Still smiling, she gracefully moved away, turning and glancing at her husband.
Prince Andrew's eyes were closed, so weary and sleepy did he seem.
"Are you ready?" he asked his wife, looking past her.
Prince Hippolyte hurriedly put on his cloak, which in the latest fashion
reached to his very heels, and, stumbling in it, ran out into the porch following
the princess, whom a footman was helping into the carriage.
"Princesse, au revoir," cried he, stumbling with his tongue as well as with his
feet.
The princess, picking up her dress, was taking her seat in the dark carriage, her
husband was adjusting his saber; Prince Hippolyte, under pretense of helping,
was in everyone's way.
"Allow me, sir," said Prince Andrew in Russian in a cold, disagreeable tone to
Prince Hippolyte who was blocking his path.
"I am expecting you, Pierre," said the same voice, but gently and
affectionately.
The postilion started, the carriage wheels rattled. Prince Hippolyte laughed
spasmodically as he stood in the porch waiting for the vicomte whom he had
promised to take home.
"Well, mon cher," said the vicomte, having seated himself beside Hippolyte in
the carriage, "your little princess is very nice, very nice indeed, quite French,"
and he kissed the tips of his fingers. Hippolyte burst out laughing.
"Do you know, you are a terrible chap for all your innocent airs," continued
the vicomte. "I pity the poor husband, that little officer who gives himself the
airs of a monarch."
Hippolyte spluttered again, and amid his laughter said, "And you were saying
that the Russian ladies are not equal to the French? One has to know how to
deal with them."
Pierre reaching the house first went into Prince Andrew's study like one quite
at home, and from habit immediately lay down on the sofa, took from the shelf
the first book that came to his hand (it was Caesar's Commentaries), and
resting on his elbow, began reading it in the middle.
"What have you done to Mlle Scherer? She will be quite ill now," said Prince
Andrew, as he entered the study, rubbing his small white hands.
Pierre turned his whole body, making the sofa creak. He lifted his eager face to
Prince Andrew, smiled, and waved his hand.
"That abbe is very interesting but he does not see the thing in the right light....
In my opinion perpetual peace is possible but—I do not know how to express
it... not by a balance of political power...."
It was evident that Prince Andrew was not interested in such abstract
conversation.
"One can't everywhere say all one thinks, mon cher. Well, have you at last
decided on anything? Are you going to be a guardsman or a diplomatist?"
asked Prince Andrew after a momentary silence.
Pierre sat up on the sofa, with his legs tucked under him.
"Really, I don't yet know. I don't like either the one or the other."
"But you must decide on something! Your father expects it."
Pierre at the age of ten had been sent abroad with an abbe as tutor, and had
remained away till he was twenty. When he returned to Moscow his father
dismissed the abbe and said to the young man, "Now go to Petersburg, look
round, and choose your profession. I will agree to anything. Here is a letter to
Prince Vasili, and here is money. Write to me all about it, and I will help you
in everything." Pierre had already been choosing a career for three months,
and had not decided on anything. It was about this choice that Prince Andrew
was speaking. Pierre rubbed his forehead.
"But he must be a Freemason," said he, referring to the abbe whom he had met
that evening.
"That is all nonsense." Prince Andrew again interrupted him, "let us talk
business. Have you been to the Horse Guards?"
"No, I have not; but this is what I have been thinking and wanted to tell you.
There is a war now against Napoleon. If it were a war for freedom I could
understand it and should be the first to enter the army; but to help England and
Austria against the greatest man in the world is not right."
Prince Andrew only shrugged his shoulders at Pierre's childish words. He put
on the air of one who finds it impossible to reply to such nonsense, but it
would in fact have been difficult to give any other answer than the one Prince
Andrew gave to this naive question.
"If no one fought except on his own conviction, there would be no wars," he
said.
"And that would be splendid," said Pierre.
Prince Andrew smiled ironically.
"Very likely it would be splendid, but it will never come about..."
"Well, why are you going to the war?" asked Pierre.
"What for? I don't know. I must. Besides that I am going..." He paused. "I am
going because the life I am leading here does not suit me!"
CHAPTER VII
The rustle of a woman's dress was heard in the next room. Prince Andrew
shook himself as if waking up, and his face assumed the look it had had in
Anna Pavlovna's drawing room. Pierre removed his feet from the sofa. The
princess came in. She had changed her gown for a house dress as fresh and
elegant as the other. Prince Andrew rose and politely placed a chair for her.
"How is it," she began, as usual in French, settling down briskly and fussily in
the easy chair, "how is it Annette never got married? How stupid you men all
are not to have married her! Excuse me for saying so, but you have no sense
about women. What an argumentative fellow you are, Monsieur Pierre!"
"And I am still arguing with your husband. I can't understand why he wants to
go to the war," replied Pierre, addressing the princess with none of the
embarrassment so commonly shown by young men in their intercourse with
young women.
The princess started. Evidently Pierre's words touched her to the quick.
"Ah, that is just what I tell him!" said she. "I don't understand it; I don't in the
least understand why men can't live without wars. How is it that we women
don't want anything of the kind, don't need it? Now you shall judge between
us. I always tell him: Here he is Uncle's aide-de-camp, a most brilliant
position. He is so well known, so much appreciated by everyone. The other
day at the Apraksins' I heard a lady asking, 'Is that the famous Prince
Andrew?' I did indeed." She laughed. "He is so well received everywhere. He
might easily become aide-de-camp to the Emperor. You know the Emperor
spoke to him most graciously. Annette and I were speaking of how to arrange
it. What do you think?"
Pierre looked at his friend and, noticing that he did not like the conversation,
gave no reply.
"When are you starting?" he asked.
"Oh, don't speak of his going, don't! I won't hear it spoken of," said the
princess in the same petulantly playful tone in which she had spoken to
Hippolyte in the drawing room and which was so plainly ill-suited to the
family circle of which Pierre was almost a member. "Today when I
remembered that all these delightful associations must be broken off... and
then you know, Andre..." (she looked significantly at her husband) "I'm afraid,
I'm afraid!" she whispered, and a shudder ran down her back.
Her husband looked at her as if surprised to notice that someone besides Pierre
and himself was in the room, and addressed her in a tone of frigid politeness.
"What is it you are afraid of, Lise? I don't understand," said he.
"There, what egotists men all are: all, all egotists! Just for a whim of his own,
goodness only knows why, he leaves me and locks me up alone in the
country."
"With my father and sister, remember," said Prince Andrew gently.
"Alone all the same, without my friends.... And he expects me not to be
afraid."
Her tone was now querulous and her lip drawn up, giving her not a joyful, but
an animal, squirrel-like expression. She paused as if she felt it indecorous to
speak of her pregnancy before Pierre, though the gist of the matter lay in that.
"I still can't understand what you are afraid of," said Prince Andrew slowly,
not taking his eyes off his wife.
The princess blushed, and raised her arms with a gesture of despair.
"No, Andrew, I must say you have changed. Oh, how you have..."
"Your doctor tells you to go to bed earlier," said Prince Andrew. "You had
better go."
The princess said nothing, but suddenly her short downy lip quivered. Prince
Andrew rose, shrugged his shoulders, and walked about the room.
Pierre looked over his spectacles with naive surprise, now at him and now at
her, moved as if about to rise too, but changed his mind.
"Why should I mind Monsieur Pierre being here?" exclaimed the little
princess suddenly, her pretty face all at once distorted by a tearful grimace. "I
have long wanted to ask you, Andrew, why you have changed so to me? What
have I done to you? You are going to the war and have no pity for me. Why is
it?"
"Lise!" was all Prince Andrew said. But that one word expressed an entreaty, a
threat, and above all conviction that she would herself regret her words. But
she went on hurriedly:
"You treat me like an invalid or a child. I see it all! Did you behave like that
six months ago?"
"Lise, I beg you to desist," said Prince Andrew still more emphatically.
Pierre, who had been growing more and more agitated as he listened to all this,
rose and approached the princess. He seemed unable to bear the sight of tears
and was ready to cry himself.
"Calm yourself, Princess! It seems so to you because... I assure you I myself
have experienced... and so... because... No, excuse me! An outsider is out of
place here... No, don't distress yourself... Good-bye!"
Prince Andrew caught him by the hand.
"No, wait, Pierre! The princess is too kind to wish to deprive me of the
pleasure of spending the evening with you."
"No, he thinks only of himself," muttered the princess without restraining her
angry tears.
"Lise!" said Prince Andrew dryly, raising his voice to the pitch which indicates
that patience is exhausted.
Suddenly the angry, squirrel-like expression of the princess' pretty face
changed into a winning and piteous look of fear. Her beautiful eyes glanced
askance at her husband's face, and her own assumed the timid, deprecating
expression of a dog when it rapidly but feebly wags its drooping tail.
"Mon Dieu, mon Dieu!" she muttered, and lifting her dress with one hand she
went up to her husband and kissed him on the forehead.
"Good night, Lise," said he, rising and courteously kissing her hand as he
would have done to a stranger.
CHAPTER VIII
The friends were silent. Neither cared to begin talking. Pierre continually
glanced at Prince Andrew; Prince Andrew rubbed his forehead with his small
hand.
"Let us go and have supper," he said with a sigh, going to the door.
They entered the elegant, newly decorated, and luxurious dining room.
Everything from the table napkins to the silver, china, and glass bore that
imprint of newness found in the households of the newly married. Halfway
through supper Prince Andrew leaned his elbows on the table and, with a look
of nervous agitation such as Pierre had never before seen on his face, began to
talk—as one who has long had something on his mind and suddenly
determines to speak out.
"Never, never marry, my dear fellow! That's my advice: never marry till you
can say to yourself that you have done all you are capable of, and until you
have ceased to love the woman of your choice and have seen her plainly as she
is, or else you will make a cruel and irrevocable mistake. Marry when you are
old and good for nothing—or all that is good and noble in you will be lost. It
will all be wasted on trifles. Yes! Yes! Yes! Don't look at me with such
surprise. If you marry expecting anything from yourself in the future, you will
feel at every step that for you all is ended, all is closed except the drawing
room, where you will be ranged side by side with a court lackey and an
idiot!... But what's the good?..." and he waved his arm.
Pierre took off his spectacles, which made his face seem different and the
good-natured expression still more apparent, and gazed at his friend in
amazement.
"My wife," continued Prince Andrew, "is an excellent woman, one of those
rare women with whom a man's honor is safe; but, O God, what would I not
give now to be unmarried! You are the first and only one to whom I mention
this, because I like you."
As he said this Prince Andrew was less than ever like that Bolkonski who had
lolled in Anna Pavlovna's easy chairs and with half-closed eyes had uttered
French phrases between his teeth. Every muscle of his thin face was now
quivering with nervous excitement; his eyes, in which the fire of life had
seemed extinguished, now flashed with brilliant light. It was evident that the
more lifeless he seemed at ordinary times, the more impassioned he became in
these moments of almost morbid irritation.
"You don't understand why I say this," he continued, "but it is the whole story
of life. You talk of Bonaparte and his career," said he (though Pierre had not
mentioned Bonaparte), "but Bonaparte when he worked went step by step
toward his goal. He was free, he had nothing but his aim to consider, and he
reached it. But tie yourself up with a woman and, like a chained convict, you
lose all freedom! And all you have of hope and strength merely weighs you
down and torments you with regret. Drawing rooms, gossip, balls, vanity, and
triviality—these are the enchanted circle I cannot escape from. I am now
going to the war, the greatest war there ever was, and I know nothing and am
fit for nothing. I am very amiable and have a caustic wit," continued Prince
Andrew, "and at Anna Pavlovna's they listen to me. And that stupid set
without whom my wife cannot exist, and those women... If you only knew
what those society women are, and women in general! My father is right.
Selfish, vain, stupid, trivial in everything—that's what women are when you
see them in their true colors! When you meet them in society it seems as if
there were something in them, but there's nothing, nothing, nothing! No, don't
marry, my dear fellow; don't marry!" concluded Prince Andrew.
"It seems funny to me," said Pierre, "that you, you should consider yourself
incapable and your life a spoiled life. You have everything before you,
everything. And you..."
He did not finish his sentence, but his tone showed how highly he thought of
his friend and how much he expected of him in the future.
"How can he talk like that?" thought Pierre. He considered his friend a model
of perfection because Prince Andrew possessed in the highest degree just the
very qualities Pierre lacked, and which might be best described as strength of
will. Pierre was always astonished at Prince Andrew's calm manner of treating
everybody, his extraordinary memory, his extensive reading (he had read
everything, knew everything, and had an opinion about everything), but above
all at his capacity for work and study. And if Pierre was often struck by
Andrew's lack of capacity for philosophical meditation (to which he himself
was particularly addicted), he regarded even this not as a defect but as a sign
of strength.
Even in the best, most friendly and simplest relations of life, praise and
commendation are essential, just as grease is necessary to wheels that they
may run smoothly.
"My part is played out," said Prince Andrew. "What's the use of talking about
me? Let us talk about you," he added after a silence, smiling at his reassuring
thoughts.
That smile was immediately reflected on Pierre's face.
"But what is there to say about me?" said Pierre, his face relaxing into a
careless, merry smile. "What am I? An illegitimate son!" He suddenly blushed
crimson, and it was plain that he had made a great effort to say this. "Without
a name and without means... And it really..." But he did not say what "it
really" was. "For the present I am free and am all right. Only I haven't the least
idea what I am to do; I wanted to consult you seriously."
Prince Andrew looked kindly at him, yet his glance—friendly and affectionate
as it was—expressed a sense of his own superiority.
"I am fond of you, especially as you are the one live man among our whole
set. Yes, you're all right! Choose what you will; it's all the same. You'll be all
right anywhere. But look here: give up visiting those Kuragins and leading
that sort of life. It suits you so badly—all this debauchery, dissipation, and the
rest of it!"
"What would you have, my dear fellow?" answered Pierre, shrugging his
shoulders. "Women, my dear fellow; women!"
"I don't understand it," replied Prince Andrew. "Women who are comme il
faut, that's a different matter; but the Kuragins' set of women, 'women and
wine' I don't understand!"
Pierre was staying at Prince Vasili Kuragin's and sharing the dissipated life of
his son Anatole, the son whom they were planning to reform by marrying him
to Prince Andrew's sister.
"Do you know?" said Pierre, as if suddenly struck by a happy thought,
"seriously, I have long been thinking of it.... Leading such a life I can't decide
or think properly about anything. One's head aches, and one spends all one's
money. He asked me for tonight, but I won't go."
"You give me your word of honor not to go?"
"On my honor!"
CHAPTER IX
It was past one o'clock when Pierre left his friend. It was a cloudless, northern,
summer night. Pierre took an open cab intending to drive straight home. But
the nearer he drew to the house the more he felt the impossibility of going to
sleep on such a night. It was light enough to see a long way in the deserted
street and it seemed more like morning or evening than night. On the way
Pierre remembered that Anatole Kuragin was expecting the usual set for cards
that evening, after which there was generally a drinking bout, finishing with
visits of a kind Pierre was very fond of.
"I should like to go to Kuragin's," thought he.
But he immediately recalled his promise to Prince Andrew not to go there.
Then, as happens to people of weak character, he desired so passionately once
more to enjoy that dissipation he was so accustomed to that he decided to go.
The thought immediately occurred to him that his promise to Prince Andrew
was of no account, because before he gave it he had already promised Prince
Anatole to come to his gathering; "besides," thought he, "all such 'words of
honor' are conventional things with no definite meaning, especially if one
considers that by tomorrow one may be dead, or something so extraordinary
may happen to one that honor and dishonor will be all the same!" Pierre often
indulged in reflections of this sort, nullifying all his decisions and intentions.
He went to Kuragin's.
Reaching the large house near the Horse Guards' barracks, in which Anatole
lived, Pierre entered the lighted porch, ascended the stairs, and went in at the
open door. There was no one in the anteroom; empty bottles, cloaks, and
overshoes were lying about; there was a smell of alcohol, and sounds of voices
and shouting in the distance.
Cards and supper were over, but the visitors had not yet dispersed. Pierre
threw off his cloak and entered the first room, in which were the remains of
supper. A footman, thinking no one saw him, was drinking on the sly what was
left in the glasses. From the third room came sounds of laughter, the shouting
of familiar voices, the growling of a bear, and general commotion. Some eight
or nine young men were crowding anxiously round an open window. Three
others were romping with a young bear, one pulling him by the chain and
trying to set him at the others.
"I bet a hundred on Stevens!" shouted one.
"Mind, no holding on!" cried another.
"I bet on Dolokhov!" cried a third. "Kuragin, you part our hands."
"There, leave Bruin alone; here's a bet on."
"At one draught, or he loses!" shouted a fourth.
"Jacob, bring a bottle!" shouted the host, a tall, handsome fellow who stood in
the midst of the group, without a coat, and with his fine linen shirt unfastened
in front. "Wait a bit, you fellows.... Here is Petya! Good man!" cried he,
addressing Pierre.
Another voice, from a man of medium height with clear blue eyes, particularly
striking among all these drunken voices by its sober ring, cried from the
window: "Come here; part the bets!" This was Dolokhov, an officer of the
Semenov regiment, a notorious gambler and duelist, who was living with
Anatole. Pierre smiled, looking about him merrily.
"I don't understand. What's it all about?"
"Wait a bit, he is not drunk yet! A bottle here," said Anatole, taking a glass
from the table he went up to Pierre.
"First of all you must drink!"
Pierre drank one glass after another, looking from under his brows at the tipsy
guests who were again crowding round the window, and listening to their
chatter. Anatole kept on refilling Pierre's glass while explaining that Dolokhov
was betting with Stevens, an English naval officer, that he would drink a bottle
of rum sitting on the outer ledge of the third floor window with his legs
hanging out.
"Go on, you must drink it all," said Anatole, giving Pierre the last glass, "or I
won't let you go!"
"No, I won't," said Pierre, pushing Anatole aside, and he went up to the
window.
Dolokhov was holding the Englishman's hand and clearly and distinctly
repeating the terms of the bet, addressing himself particularly to Anatole and
Pierre.
Dolokhov was of medium height, with curly hair and light-blue eyes. He was
about twenty-five. Like all infantry officers he wore no mustache, so that his
mouth, the most striking feature of his face, was clearly seen. The lines of that
mouth were remarkably finely curved. The middle of the upper lip formed a
sharp wedge and closed firmly on the firm lower one, and something like two
distinct smiles played continually round the two corners of the mouth; this,
together with the resolute, insolent intelligence of his eyes, produced an effect
which made it impossible not to notice his face. Dolokhov was a man of small
means and no connections. Yet, though Anatole spent tens of thousands of
rubles, Dolokhov lived with him and had placed himself on such a footing that
all who knew them, including Anatole himself, respected him more than they
did Anatole. Dolokhov could play all games and nearly always won. However
much he drank, he never lost his clearheadedness. Both Kuragin and
Dolokhov were at that time notorious among the rakes and scapegraces of
Petersburg.
The bottle of rum was brought. The window frame which prevented anyone
from sitting on the outer sill was being forced out by two footmen, who were
evidently flurried and intimidated by the directions and shouts of the
gentlemen around.
Anatole with his swaggering air strode up to the window. He wanted to smash
something. Pushing away the footmen he tugged at the frame, but could not
move it. He smashed a pane.
"You have a try, Hercules," said he, turning to Pierre.
Pierre seized the crossbeam, tugged, and wrenched the oak frame out with a
crash.
"Take it right out, or they'll think I'm holding on," said Dolokhov.
"Is the Englishman bragging?... Eh? Is it all right?" said Anatole.
"First-rate," said Pierre, looking at Dolokhov, who with a bottle of rum in his
hand was approaching the window, from which the light of the sky, the dawn
merging with the afterglow of sunset, was visible.
Dolokhov, the bottle of rum still in his hand, jumped onto the window sill.
"Listen!" cried he, standing there and addressing those in the room. All were
silent.
"I bet fifty imperials"—he spoke French that the Englishman might understand
him, but he did not speak it very well—"I bet fifty imperials... or do you wish
to make it a hundred?" added he, addressing the Englishman.
"No, fifty," replied the latter.
"All right. Fifty imperials... that I will drink a whole bottle of rum without
taking it from my mouth, sitting outside the window on this spot" (he stooped
and pointed to the sloping ledge outside the window) "and without holding on
to anything. Is that right?"
"Quite right," said the Englishman.
Anatole turned to the Englishman and taking him by one of the buttons of his
coat and looking down at him—the Englishman was short—began repeating
the terms of the wager to him in English.
"Wait!" cried Dolokhov, hammering with the bottle on the window sill to
attract attention. "Wait a bit, Kuragin. Listen! If anyone else does the same, I
will pay him a hundred imperials. Do you understand?"
The Englishman nodded, but gave no indication whether he intended to accept
this challenge or not. Anatole did not release him, and though he kept nodding
to show that he understood, Anatole went on translating Dolokhov's words
into English. A thin young lad, an hussar of the Life Guards, who had been
losing that evening, climbed on the window sill, leaned over, and looked
down.
"Oh! Oh! Oh!" he muttered, looking down from the window at the stones of
the pavement.
"Shut up!" cried Dolokhov, pushing him away from the window. The lad
jumped awkwardly back into the room, tripping over his spurs.
Placing the bottle on the window sill where he could reach it easily, Dolokhov
climbed carefully and slowly through the window and lowered his legs.
Pressing against both sides of the window, he adjusted himself on his seat,
lowered his hands, moved a little to the right and then to the left, and took up
the bottle. Anatole brought two candles and placed them on the window sill,
though it was already quite light. Dolokhov's back in his white shirt, and his
curly head, were lit up from both sides. Everyone crowded to the window, the
Englishman in front. Pierre stood smiling but silent. One man, older than the
others present, suddenly pushed forward with a scared and angry look and
wanted to seize hold of Dolokhov's shirt.
"I say, this is folly! He'll be killed," said this more sensible man.
Anatole stopped him.
"Don't touch him! You'll startle him and then he'll be killed. Eh?... What
then?... Eh?"
Dolokhov turned round and, again holding on with both hands, arranged
himself on his seat.
"If anyone comes meddling again," said he, emitting the words separately
through his thin compressed lips, "I will throw him down there. Now then!"
Saying this he again turned round, dropped his hands, took the bottle and lifted
it to his lips, threw back his head, and raised his free hand to balance himself.
One of the footmen who had stooped to pick up some broken glass remained
in that position without taking his eyes from the window and from Dolokhov's
back. Anatole stood erect with staring eyes. The Englishman looked on
sideways, pursing up his lips. The man who had wished to stop the affair ran
to a corner of the room and threw himself on a sofa with his face to the wall.
Pierre hid his face, from which a faint smile forgot to fade though his features
now expressed horror and fear. All were still. Pierre took his hands from his
eyes. Dolokhov still sat in the same position, only his head was thrown further
back till his curly hair touched his shirt collar, and the hand holding the bottle
was lifted higher and higher and trembled with the effort. The bottle was
emptying perceptibly and rising still higher and his head tilting yet further
back. "Why is it so long?" thought Pierre. It seemed to him that more than half
an hour had elapsed. Suddenly Dolokhov made a backward movement with
his spine, and his arm trembled nervously; this was sufficient to cause his
whole body to slip as he sat on the sloping ledge. As he began slipping down,
his head and arm wavered still more with the strain. One hand moved as if to
clutch the window sill, but refrained from touching it. Pierre again covered his
eyes and thought he would never open them again. Suddenly he was aware of
a stir all around. He looked up: Dolokhov was standing on the window sill,
with a pale but radiant face.
"It's empty."
He threw the bottle to the Englishman, who caught it neatly. Dolokhov jumped
down. He smelt strongly of rum.
"Well done!... Fine fellow!... There's a bet for you!... Devil take you!" came
from different sides.
The Englishman took out his purse and began counting out the money.
Dolokhov stood frowning and did not speak. Pierre jumped upon the window
sill.
"Gentlemen, who wishes to bet with me? I'll do the same thing!" he suddenly
cried. "Even without a bet, there! Tell them to bring me a bottle. I'll do it....
Bring a bottle!"
"Let him do it, let him do it," said Dolokhov, smiling.
"What next? Have you gone mad?... No one would let you!... Why, you go
giddy even on a staircase," exclaimed several voices.
"I'll drink it! Let's have a bottle of rum!" shouted Pierre, banging the table with
a determined and drunken gesture and preparing to climb out of the window.
They seized him by his arms; but he was so strong that everyone who touched
him was sent flying.
"No, you'll never manage him that way," said Anatole. "Wait a bit and I'll get
round him.... Listen! I'll take your bet tomorrow, but now we are all going to
——'s."
"Come on then," cried Pierre. "Come on!... And we'll take Bruin with us."
And he caught the bear, took it in his arms, lifted it from the ground, and
began dancing round the room with it.
CHAPTER X
Prince Vasili kept the promise he had given to Princess Drubetskaya who had
spoken to him on behalf of her only son Boris on the evening of Anna
Pavlovna's soiree. The matter was mentioned to the Emperor, an exception
made, and Boris transferred into the regiment of Semenov Guards with the
rank of cornet. He received, however, no appointment to Kutuzov's staff
despite all Anna Mikhaylovna's endeavors and entreaties. Soon after Anna
Pavlovna's reception Anna Mikhaylovna returned to Moscow and went
straight to her rich relations, the Rostovs, with whom she stayed when in the
town and where her darling Bory, who had only just entered a regiment of the
line and was being at once transferred to the Guards as a cornet, had been
educated from childhood and lived for years at a time. The Guards had already
left Petersburg on the tenth of August, and her son, who had remained in
Moscow for his equipment, was to join them on the march to Radzivilov.
It was St. Natalia's day and the name day of two of the Rostovs—the mother
and the youngest daughter—both named Nataly. Ever since the morning,
carriages with six horses had been coming and going continually, bringing
visitors to the Countess Rostova's big house on the Povarskaya, so well known
to all Moscow. The countess herself and her handsome eldest daughter were in
the drawing-room with the visitors who came to congratulate, and who
constantly succeeded one another in relays.
The countess was a woman of about forty-five, with a thin Oriental type of
face, evidently worn out with childbearing—she had had twelve. A languor of
motion and speech, resulting from weakness, gave her a distinguished air
which inspired respect. Princess Anna Mikhaylovna Drubetskaya, who as a
member of the household was also seated in the drawing room, helped to
receive and entertain the visitors. The young people were in one of the inner
rooms, not considering it necessary to take part in receiving the visitors. The
count met the guests and saw them off, inviting them all to dinner.
"I am very, very grateful to you, mon cher," or "ma chere"—he called
everyone without exception and without the slightest variation in his tone, "my
dear," whether they were above or below him in rank—"I thank you for myself
and for our two dear ones whose name day we are keeping. But mind you
come to dinner or I shall be offended, ma chere! On behalf of the whole family
I beg you to come, mon cher!" These words he repeated to everyone without
exception or variation, and with the same expression on his full, cheerful,
clean-shaven face, the same firm pressure of the hand and the same quick,
repeated bows. As soon as he had seen a visitor off he returned to one of those
who were still in the drawing room, drew a chair toward him or her, and
jauntily spreading out his legs and putting his hands on his knees with the air
of a man who enjoys life and knows how to live, he swayed to and fro with
dignity, offered surmises about the weather, or touched on questions of health,
sometimes in Russian and sometimes in very bad but self-confident French;
then again, like a man weary but unflinching in the fulfillment of duty, he rose
to see some visitors off and, stroking his scanty gray hairs over his bald patch,
also asked them to dinner. Sometimes on his way back from the anteroom he
would pass through the conservatory and pantry into the large marble dining
hall, where tables were being set out for eighty people; and looking at the
footmen, who were bringing in silver and china, moving tables, and unfolding
damask table linen, he would call Dmitri Vasilevich, a man of good family and
the manager of all his affairs, and while looking with pleasure at the enormous
table would say: "Well, Dmitri, you'll see that things are all as they should be?
That's right! The great thing is the serving, that's it." And with a complacent
sigh he would return to the drawing room.
"Marya Lvovna Karagina and her daughter!" announced the countess' gigantic
footman in his bass voice, entering the drawing room. The countess reflected a
moment and took a pinch from a gold snuffbox with her husband's portrait on
it.
"I'm quite worn out by these callers. However, I'll see her and no more. She is
so affected. Ask her in," she said to the footman in a sad voice, as if saying:
"Very well, finish me off."
A tall, stout, and proud-looking woman, with a round-faced smiling daughter,
entered the drawing room, their dresses rustling.
"Dear Countess, what an age... She has been laid up, poor child... at the
Razumovski's ball... and Countess Apraksina... I was so delighted..." came the
sounds of animated feminine voices, interrupting one another and mingling
with the rustling of dresses and the scraping of chairs. Then one of those
conversations began which last out until, at the first pause, the guests rise with
a rustle of dresses and say, "I am so delighted... Mamma's health... and
Countess Apraksina..." and then, again rustling, pass into the anteroom, put on
cloaks or mantles, and drive away. The conversation was on the chief topic of
the day: the illness of the wealthy and celebrated beau of Catherine's day,
Count Bezukhov, and about his illegitimate son Pierre, the one who had
behaved so improperly at Anna Pavlovna's reception.
"I am so sorry for the poor count," said the visitor. "He is in such bad health,
and now this vexation about his son is enough to kill him!"
"What is that?" asked the countess as if she did not know what the visitor
alluded to, though she had already heard about the cause of Count Bezukhov's
distress some fifteen times.
"That's what comes of a modern education," exclaimed the visitor. "It seems
that while he was abroad this young man was allowed to do as he liked, now
in Petersburg I hear he has been doing such terrible things that he has been
expelled by the police."
"You don't say so!" replied the countess.
"He chose his friends badly," interposed Anna Mikhaylovna. "Prince Vasili's
son, he, and a certain Dolokhov have, it is said, been up to heaven only knows
what! And they have had to suffer for it. Dolokhov has been degraded to the
ranks and Bezukhov's son sent back to Moscow. Anatole Kuragin's father
managed somehow to get his son's affair hushed up, but even he was ordered
out of Petersburg."
"But what have they been up to?" asked the countess.
"They are regular brigands, especially Dolokhov," replied the visitor. "He is a
son of Marya Ivanovna Dolokhova, such a worthy woman, but there, just
fancy! Those three got hold of a bear somewhere, put it in a carriage, and set
off with it to visit some actresses! The police tried to interfere, and what did
the young men do? They tied a policeman and the bear back to back and put
the bear into the Moyka Canal. And there was the bear swimming about with
the policeman on his back!"
"What a nice figure the policeman must have cut, my dear!" shouted the count,
dying with laughter.
"Oh, how dreadful! How can you laugh at it, Count?"
Yet the ladies themselves could not help laughing.
"It was all they could do to rescue the poor man," continued the visitor. "And
to think it is Cyril Vladimirovich Bezukhov's son who amuses himself in this
sensible manner! And he was said to be so well educated and clever. This is all
that his foreign education has done for him! I hope that here in Moscow no
one will receive him, in spite of his money. They wanted to introduce him to
me, but I quite declined: I have my daughters to consider."
"Why do you say this young man is so rich?" asked the countess, turning away
from the girls, who at once assumed an air of inattention. "His children are all
illegitimate. I think Pierre also is illegitimate."
The visitor made a gesture with her hand.
"I should think he has a score of them."
Princess Anna Mikhaylovna intervened in the conversation, evidently wishing
to show her connections and knowledge of what went on in society.
"The fact of the matter is," said she significantly, and also in a half whisper,
"everyone knows Count Cyril's reputation.... He has lost count of his children,
but this Pierre was his favorite."
"How handsome the old man still was only a year ago!" remarked the
countess. "I have never seen a handsomer man."
"He is very much altered now," said Anna Mikhaylovna. "Well, as I was
saying, Prince Vasili is the next heir through his wife, but the count is very
fond of Pierre, looked after his education, and wrote to the Emperor about
him; so that in the case of his death—and he is so ill that he may die at any
moment, and Dr. Lorrain has come from Petersburg—no one knows who will
inherit his immense fortune, Pierre or Prince Vasili. Forty thousand serfs and
millions of rubles! I know it all very well for Prince Vasili told me himself.
Besides, Cyril Vladimirovich is my mother's second cousin. He's also my
Bory's godfather," she added, as if she attached no importance at all to the fact.
"Prince Vasili arrived in Moscow yesterday. I hear he has come on some
inspection business," remarked the visitor.
"Yes, but between ourselves," said the princess, "that is a pretext. The fact is
he has come to see Count Cyril Vladimirovich, hearing how ill he is."
"But do you know, my dear, that was a capital joke," said the count; and seeing
that the elder visitor was not listening, he turned to the young ladies. "I can
just imagine what a funny figure that policeman cut!"
And as he waved his arms to impersonate the policeman, his portly form again
shook with a deep ringing laugh, the laugh of one who always eats well and, in
particular, drinks well. "So do come and dine with us!" he said.
CHAPTER XI
Silence ensued. The countess looked at her callers, smiling affably, but not
concealing the fact that she would not be distressed if they now rose and took
their leave. The visitor's daughter was already smoothing down her dress with
an inquiring look at her mother, when suddenly from the next room were
heard the footsteps of boys and girls running to the door and the noise of a
chair falling over, and a girl of thirteen, hiding something in the folds of her
short muslin frock, darted in and stopped short in the middle of the room. It
was evident that she had not intended her flight to bring her so far. Behind her
in the doorway appeared a student with a crimson coat collar, an officer of the
Guards, a girl of fifteen, and a plump rosy-faced boy in a short jacket.
The count jumped up and, swaying from side to side, spread his arms wide and
threw them round the little girl who had run in.
"Ah, here she is!" he exclaimed laughing. "My pet, whose name day it is. My
dear pet!"
"Ma chere, there is a time for everything," said the countess with feigned
severity. "You spoil her, Ilya," she added, turning to her husband.
"How do you do, my dear? I wish you many happy returns of your name day,"
said the visitor. "What a charming child," she added, addressing the mother.
This black-eyed, wide-mouthed girl, not pretty but full of life—with childish
bare shoulders which after her run heaved and shook her bodice, with black
curls tossed backward, thin bare arms, little legs in lace-frilled drawers, and
feet in low slippers—was just at that charming age when a girl is no longer a
child, though the child is not yet a young woman. Escaping from her father she
ran to hide her flushed face in the lace of her mother's mantilla—not paying
the least attention to her severe remark—and began to laugh. She laughed, and
in fragmentary sentences tried to explain about a doll which she produced
from the folds of her frock.
"Do you see?... My doll... Mimi... You see..." was all Natasha managed to utter
(to her everything seemed funny). She leaned against her mother and burst
into such a loud, ringing fit of laughter that even the prim visitor could not
help joining in.
"Now then, go away and take your monstrosity with you," said the mother,
pushing away her daughter with pretended sternness, and turning to the visitor
she added: "She is my youngest girl."
Natasha, raising her face for a moment from her mother's mantilla, glanced up
at her through tears of laughter, and again hid her face.
The visitor, compelled to look on at this family scene, thought it necessary to
take some part in it.
"Tell me, my dear," said she to Natasha, "is Mimi a relation of yours? A
daughter, I suppose?"
Natasha did not like the visitor's tone of condescension to childish things. She
did not reply, but looked at her seriously.
Meanwhile the younger generation: Boris, the officer, Anna Mikhaylovna's
son; Nicholas, the undergraduate, the count's eldest son; Sonya, the count's
fifteen-year-old niece, and little Petya, his youngest boy, had all settled down
in the drawing room and were obviously trying to restrain within the bounds
of decorum the excitement and mirth that shone in all their faces. Evidently in
the back rooms, from which they had dashed out so impetuously, the
conversation had been more amusing than the drawing-room talk of society
scandals, the weather, and Countess Apraksina. Now and then they glanced at
one another, hardly able to suppress their laughter.
The two young men, the student and the officer, friends from childhood, were
of the same age and both handsome fellows, though not alike. Boris was tall
and fair, and his calm and handsome face had regular, delicate features.
Nicholas was short with curly hair and an open expression. Dark hairs were
already showing on his upper lip, and his whole face expressed impetuosity
and enthusiasm. Nicholas blushed when he entered the drawing room. He
evidently tried to find something to say, but failed. Boris on the contrary at
once found his footing, and related quietly and humorously how he had known
that doll Mimi when she was still quite a young lady, before her nose was
broken; how she had aged during the five years he had known her, and how
her head had cracked right across the skull. Having said this he glanced at
Natasha. She turned away from him and glanced at her younger brother, who
was screwing up his eyes and shaking with suppressed laughter, and unable to
control herself any longer, she jumped up and rushed from the room as fast as
her nimble little feet would carry her. Boris did not laugh.
"You were meaning to go out, weren't you, Mamma? Do you want the
carriage?" he asked his mother with a smile.
"Yes, yes, go and tell them to get it ready," she answered, returning his smile.
Boris quietly left the room and went in search of Natasha. The plump boy ran
after them angrily, as if vexed that their program had been disturbed.
CHAPTER XII
The only young people remaining in the drawing room, not counting the
young lady visitor and the countess' eldest daughter (who was four years older
than her sister and behaved already like a grown-up person), were Nicholas
and Sonya, the niece. Sonya was a slender little brunette with a tender look in
her eyes which were veiled by long lashes, thick black plaits coiling twice
round her head, and a tawny tint in her complexion and especially in the color
of her slender but graceful and muscular arms and neck. By the grace of her
movements, by the softness and flexibility of her small limbs, and by a certain
coyness and reserve of manner, she reminded one of a pretty, half-grown kitten
which promises to become a beautiful little cat. She evidently considered it
proper to show an interest in the general conversation by smiling, but in spite
of herself her eyes under their thick long lashes watched her cousin who was
going to join the army, with such passionate girlish adoration that her smile
could not for a single instant impose upon anyone, and it was clear that the
kitten had settled down only to spring up with more energy and again play
with her cousin as soon as they too could, like Natasha and Boris, escape from
the drawing room.
"Ah yes, my dear," said the count, addressing the visitor and pointing to
Nicholas, "his friend Boris has become an officer, and so for friendship's sake
he is leaving the university and me, his old father, and entering the military
service, my dear. And there was a place and everything waiting for him in the
Archives Department! Isn't that friendship?" remarked the count in an
inquiring tone.
"But they say that war has been declared," replied the visitor.
"They've been saying so a long while," said the count, "and they'll say so again
and again, and that will be the end of it. My dear, there's friendship for you,"
he repeated. "He's joining the hussars."
The visitor, not knowing what to say, shook her head.
"It's not at all from friendship," declared Nicholas, flaring up and turning away
as if from a shameful aspersion. "It is not from friendship at all; I simply feel
that the army is my vocation."
He glanced at his cousin and the young lady visitor; and they were both
regarding him with a smile of approbation.
"Schubert, the colonel of the Pavlograd Hussars, is dining with us today. He
has been here on leave and is taking Nicholas back with him. It can't be
helped!" said the count, shrugging his shoulders and speaking playfully of a
matter that evidently distressed him.
"I have already told you, Papa," said his son, "that if you don't wish to let me
go, I'll stay. But I know I am no use anywhere except in the army; I am not a
diplomat or a government clerk.—I don't know how to hide what I feel." As he
spoke he kept glancing with the flirtatiousness of a handsome youth at Sonya
and the young lady visitor.
The little kitten, feasting her eyes on him, seemed ready at any moment to start
her gambols again and display her kittenish nature.
"All right, all right!" said the old count. "He always flares up! This Buonaparte
has turned all their heads; they all think of how he rose from an ensign and
became Emperor. Well, well, God grant it," he added, not noticing his visitor's
sarcastic smile.
The elders began talking about Bonaparte. Julie Karagina turned to young
Rostov.
"What a pity you weren't at the Arkharovs' on Thursday. It was so dull without
you," said she, giving him a tender smile.
The young man, flattered, sat down nearer to her with a coquettish smile, and
engaged the smiling Julie in a confidential conversation without at all noticing
that his involuntary smile had stabbed the heart of Sonya, who blushed and
smiled unnaturally. In the midst of his talk he glanced round at her. She gave
him a passionately angry glance, and hardly able to restrain her tears and
maintain the artificial smile on her lips, she got up and left the room. All
Nicholas' animation vanished. He waited for the first pause in the
conversation, and then with a distressed face left the room to find Sonya.
"How plainly all these young people wear their hearts on their sleeves!" said
Anna Mikhaylovna, pointing to Nicholas as he went out. "Cousinage—
dangereux voisinage;" * she added.
* Cousinhood is a dangerous neighborhood.
"Yes," said the countess when the brightness these young people had brought
into the room had vanished; and as if answering a question no one had put but
which was always in her mind, "and how much suffering, how much anxiety
one has had to go through that we might rejoice in them now! And yet really
the anxiety is greater now than the joy. One is always, always anxious!
Especially just at this age, so dangerous both for girls and boys."
"It all depends on the bringing up," remarked the visitor.
"Yes, you're quite right," continued the countess. "Till now I have always,
thank God, been my children's friend and had their full confidence," said she,
repeating the mistake of so many parents who imagine that their children have
no secrets from them. "I know I shall always be my daughters' first confidante,
and that if Nicholas, with his impulsive nature, does get into mischief (a boy
can't help it), he will all the same never be like those Petersburg young men."
"Yes, they are splendid, splendid youngsters," chimed in the count, who
always solved questions that seemed to him perplexing by deciding that
everything was splendid. "Just fancy: wants to be an hussar. What's one to do,
my dear?"
"What a charming creature your younger girl is," said the visitor; "a little
volcano!"
"Yes, a regular volcano," said the count. "Takes after me! And what a voice
she has; though she's my daughter, I tell the truth when I say she'll be a singer,
a second Salomoni! We have engaged an Italian to give her lessons."
"Isn't she too young? I have heard that it harms the voice to train it at that
age."
"Oh no, not at all too young!" replied the count. "Why, our mothers used to be
married at twelve or thirteen."
"And she's in love with Boris already. Just fancy!" said the countess with a
gentle smile, looking at Boris and went on, evidently concerned with a thought
that always occupied her: "Now you see if I were to be severe with her and to
forbid it... goodness knows what they might be up to on the sly" (she meant
that they would be kissing), "but as it is, I know every word she utters. She
will come running to me of her own accord in the evening and tell me
everything. Perhaps I spoil her, but really that seems the best plan. With her
elder sister I was stricter."
"Yes, I was brought up quite differently," remarked the handsome elder
daughter, Countess Vera, with a smile.
But the smile did not enhance Vera's beauty as smiles generally do; on the
contrary it gave her an unnatural, and therefore unpleasant, expression. Vera
was good-looking, not at all stupid, quick at learning, was well-brought up,
and had a pleasant voice; what she said was true and appropriate, yet, strange
to say, everyone—the visitors and countess alike—turned to look at her as if
wondering why she had said it, and they all felt awkward.
"People are always too clever with their eldest children and try to make
something exceptional of them," said the visitor.
"What's the good of denying it, my dear? Our dear countess was too clever
with Vera," said the count. "Well, what of that? She's turned out splendidly all
the same," he added, winking at Vera.
The guests got up and took their leave, promising to return to dinner.
"What manners! I thought they would never go," said the countess, when she
had seen her guests out.
CHAPTER XIII
When Natasha ran out of the drawing room she only went as far as the
conservatory. There she paused and stood listening to the conversation in the
drawing room, waiting for Boris to come out. She was already growing
impatient, and stamped her foot, ready to cry at his not coming at once, when
she heard the young man's discreet steps approaching neither quickly nor
slowly. At this Natasha dashed swiftly among the flower tubs and hid there.
Boris paused in the middle of the room, looked round, brushed a little dust
from the sleeve of his uniform, and going up to a mirror examined his
handsome face. Natasha, very still, peered out from her ambush, waiting to see
what he would do. He stood a little while before the glass, smiled, and walked
toward the other door. Natasha was about to call him but changed her mind.
"Let him look for me," thought she. Hardly had Boris gone than Sonya,
flushed, in tears, and muttering angrily, came in at the other door. Natasha
checked her first impulse to run out to her, and remained in her hiding place,
watching—as under an invisible cap—to see what went on in the world. She
was experiencing a new and peculiar pleasure. Sonya, muttering to herself,
kept looking round toward the drawing-room door. It opened and Nicholas
came in.
"Sonya, what is the matter with you? How can you?" said he, running up to
her.
"It's nothing, nothing; leave me alone!" sobbed Sonya.
"Ah, I know what it is."
"Well, if you do, so much the better, and you can go back to her!"
"So-o-onya! Look here! How can you torture me and yourself like that, for a
mere fancy?" said Nicholas taking her hand.
Sonya did not pull it away, and left off crying. Natasha, not stirring and
scarcely breathing, watched from her ambush with sparkling eyes. "What will
happen now?" thought she.
"Sonya! What is anyone in the world to me? You alone are everything!" said
Nicholas. "And I will prove it to you."
"I don't like you to talk like that."
"Well, then, I won't; only forgive me, Sonya!" He drew her to him and kissed
her.
"Oh, how nice," thought Natasha; and when Sonya and Nicholas had gone out
of the conservatory she followed and called Boris to her.
"Boris, come here," said she with a sly and significant look. "I have something
to tell you. Here, here!" and she led him into the conservatory to the place
among the tubs where she had been hiding.
Boris followed her, smiling.
"What is the something?" asked he.
She grew confused, glanced round, and, seeing the doll she had thrown down
on one of the tubs, picked it up.
"Kiss the doll," said she.
Boris looked attentively and kindly at her eager face, but did not reply.
"Don't you want to? Well, then, come here," said she, and went further in
among the plants and threw down the doll. "Closer, closer!" she whispered.
She caught the young officer by his cuffs, and a look of solemnity and fear
appeared on her flushed face.
"And me? Would you like to kiss me?" she whispered almost inaudibly,
glancing up at him from under her brows, smiling, and almost crying from
excitement.
Boris blushed.
"How funny you are!" he said, bending down to her and blushing still more,
but he waited and did nothing.
Suddenly she jumped up onto a tub to be higher than he, embraced him so that
both her slender bare arms clasped him above his neck, and, tossing back her
hair, kissed him full on the lips.
Then she slipped down among the flowerpots on the other side of the tubs and
stood, hanging her head.
"Natasha," he said, "you know that I love you, but..."
"You are in love with me?" Natasha broke in.
"Yes, I am, but please don't let us do like that.... In another four years... then I
will ask for your hand."
Natasha considered.
"Thirteen, fourteen, fifteen, sixteen," she counted on her slender little fingers.
"All right! Then it's settled?"
A smile of joy and satisfaction lit up her eager face.
"Settled!" replied Boris.
"Forever?" said the little girl. "Till death itself?"
She took his arm and with a happy face went with him into the adjoining
sitting room.
CHAPTER XIV
After receiving her visitors, the countess was so tired that she gave orders to
admit no more, but the porter was told to be sure to invite to dinner all who
came "to congratulate." The countess wished to have a tête-à-tête talk with the
friend of her childhood, Princess Anna Mikhaylovna, whom she had not seen
properly since she returned from Petersburg. Anna Mikhaylovna, with her
tear-worn but pleasant face, drew her chair nearer to that of the countess.
"With you I will be quite frank," said Anna Mikhaylovna. "There are not many
left of us old friends! That's why I so value your friendship."
Anna Mikhaylovna looked at Vera and paused. The countess pressed her
friend's hand.
"Vera," she said to her eldest daughter who was evidently not a favorite, "how
is it you have so little tact? Don't you see you are not wanted here? Go to the
other girls, or..."
The handsome Vera smiled contemptuously but did not seem at all hurt.
"If you had told me sooner, Mamma, I would have gone," she replied as she
rose to go to her own room.
But as she passed the sitting room she noticed two couples sitting, one pair at
each window. She stopped and smiled scornfully. Sonya was sitting close to
Nicholas who was copying out some verses for her, the first he had ever
written. Boris and Natasha were at the other window and ceased talking when
Vera entered. Sonya and Natasha looked at Vera with guilty, happy faces.
It was pleasant and touching to see these little girls in love; but apparently the
sight of them roused no pleasant feeling in Vera.
"How often have I asked you not to take my things?" she said. "You have a
room of your own," and she took the inkstand from Nicholas.
"In a minute, in a minute," he said, dipping his pen.
"You always manage to do things at the wrong time," continued Vera. "You
came rushing into the drawing room so that everyone felt ashamed of you."
Though what she said was quite just, perhaps for that very reason no one
replied, and the four simply looked at one another. She lingered in the room
with the inkstand in her hand.
"And at your age what secrets can there be between Natasha and Boris, or
between you two? It's all nonsense!"
"Now, Vera, what does it matter to you?" said Natasha in defense, speaking
very gently.
She seemed that day to be more than ever kind and affectionate to everyone.
"Very silly," said Vera. "I am ashamed of you. Secrets indeed!"
"All have secrets of their own," answered Natasha, getting warmer. "We don't
interfere with you and Berg."
"I should think not," said Vera, "because there can never be anything wrong in
my behavior. But I'll just tell Mamma how you are behaving with Boris."
"Natalya Ilynichna behaves very well to me," remarked Boris. "I have nothing
to complain of."
"Don't, Boris! You are such a diplomat that it is really tiresome," said Natasha
in a mortified voice that trembled slightly. (She used the word "diplomat,"
which was just then much in vogue among the children, in the special sense
they attached to it.) "Why does she bother me?" And she added, turning to
Vera, "You'll never understand it, because you've never loved anyone. You
have no heart! You are a Madame de Genlis and nothing more" (this
nickname, bestowed on Vera by Nicholas, was considered very stinging), "and
your greatest pleasure is to be unpleasant to people! Go and flirt with Berg as
much as you please," she finished quickly.
"I shall at any rate not run after a young man before visitors..."
"Well, now you've done what you wanted," put in Nicholas—"said unpleasant
things to everyone and upset them. Let's go to the nursery."
All four, like a flock of scared birds, got up and left the room.
"The unpleasant things were said to me," remarked Vera, "I said none to
anyone."
"Madame de Genlis! Madame de Genlis!" shouted laughing voices through the
door.
The handsome Vera, who produced such an irritating and unpleasant effect on
everyone, smiled and, evidently unmoved by what had been said to her, went
to the looking glass and arranged her hair and scarf. Looking at her own
handsome face she seemed to become still colder and calmer.
In the drawing room the conversation was still going on.
"Ah, my dear," said the countess, "my life is not all roses either. Don't I know
that at the rate we are living our means won't last long? It's all the Club and his
easygoing nature. Even in the country do we get any rest? Theatricals,
hunting, and heaven knows what besides! But don't let's talk about me; tell me
how you managed everything. I often wonder at you, Annette—how at your
age you can rush off alone in a carriage to Moscow, to Petersburg, to those
ministers and great people, and know how to deal with them all! It's quite
astonishing. How did you get things settled? I couldn't possibly do it."
"Ah, my love," answered Anna Mikhaylovna, "God grant you never know
what it is to be left a widow without means and with a son you love to
distraction! One learns many things then," she added with a certain pride.
"That lawsuit taught me much. When I want to see one of those big people I
write a note: 'Princess So-and-So desires an interview with So and-So,' and
then I take a cab and go myself two, three, or four times—till I get what I
want. I don't mind what they think of me."
"Well, and to whom did you apply about Bory?" asked the countess. "You see
yours is already an officer in the Guards, while my Nicholas is going as a
cadet. There's no one to interest himself for him. To whom did you apply?"
"To Prince Vasili. He was so kind. He at once agreed to everything, and put the
matter before the Emperor," said Princess Anna Mikhaylovna enthusiastically,
quite forgetting all the humiliation she had endured to gain her end.
"Has Prince Vasili aged much?" asked the countess. "I have not seen him since
we acted together at the Rumyantsovs' theatricals. I expect he has forgotten
me. He paid me attentions in those days," said the countess, with a smile.
"He is just the same as ever," replied Anna Mikhaylovna, "overflowing with
amiability. His position has not turned his head at all. He said to me, 'I am
sorry I can do so little for you, dear Princess. I am at your command.' Yes, he
is a fine fellow and a very kind relation. But, Nataly, you know my love for
my son: I would do anything for his happiness! And my affairs are in such a
bad way that my position is now a terrible one," continued Anna
Mikhaylovna, sadly, dropping her voice. "My wretched lawsuit takes all I have
and makes no progress. Would you believe it, I have literally not a penny and
don't know how to equip Boris." She took out her handkerchief and began to
cry. "I need five hundred rubles, and have only one twenty-five-ruble note. I
am in such a state.... My only hope now is in Count Cyril Vladimirovich
Bezukhov. If he will not assist his godson—you know he is Bory's godfather
—and allow him something for his maintenance, all my trouble will have been
thrown away.... I shall not be able to equip him."
The countess' eyes filled with tears and she pondered in silence.
"I often think, though, perhaps it's a sin," said the princess, "that here lives
Count Cyril Vladimirovich Bezukhov so rich, all alone... that tremendous
fortune... and what is his life worth? It's a burden to him, and Bory's life is
only just beginning...."
"Surely he will leave something to Boris," said the countess.
"Heaven only knows, my dear! These rich grandees are so selfish. Still, I will
take Boris and go to see him at once, and I shall speak to him straight out. Let
people think what they will of me, it's really all the same to me when my son's
fate is at stake." The princess rose. "It's now two o'clock and you dine at four.
There will just be time."
And like a practical Petersburg lady who knows how to make the most of
time, Anna Mikhaylovna sent someone to call her son, and went into the
anteroom with him.
"Good-bye, my dear," said she to the countess who saw her to the door, and
added in a whisper so that her son should not hear, "Wish me good luck."
"Are you going to Count Cyril Vladimirovich, my dear?" said the count
coming out from the dining hall into the anteroom, and he added: "If he is
better, ask Pierre to dine with us. He has been to the house, you know, and
danced with the children. Be sure to invite him, my dear. We will see how
Taras distinguishes himself today. He says Count Orlov never gave such a
dinner as ours will be!"
CHAPTER XV
"My dear Boris," said Princess Anna Mikhaylovna to her son as Countess
Rostova's carriage in which they were seated drove over the straw covered
street and turned into the wide courtyard of Count Cyril Vladimirovich
Bezukhov's house. "My dear Boris," said the mother, drawing her hand from
beneath her old mantle and laying it timidly and tenderly on her son's arm, "be
affectionate and attentive to him. Count Cyril Vladimirovich is your godfather
after all, your future depends on him. Remember that, my dear, and be nice to
him, as you so well know how to be."
"If only I knew that anything besides humiliation would come of it..."
answered her son coldly. "But I have promised and will do it for your sake."
Although the hall porter saw someone's carriage standing at the entrance, after
scrutinizing the mother and son (who without asking to be announced had
passed straight through the glass porch between the rows of statues in niches)
and looking significantly at the lady's old cloak, he asked whether they wanted
the count or the princesses, and, hearing that they wished to see the count, said
his excellency was worse today, and that his excellency was not receiving
anyone.
"We may as well go back," said the son in French.
"My dear!" exclaimed his mother imploringly, again laying her hand on his
arm as if that touch might soothe or rouse him.
Boris said no more, but looked inquiringly at his mother without taking off his
cloak.
"My friend," said Anna Mikhaylovna in gentle tones, addressing the hall
porter, "I know Count Cyril Vladimirovich is very ill... that's why I have
come... I am a relation. I shall not disturb him, my friend... I only need see
Prince Vasili Sergeevich: he is staying here, is he not? Please announce me."
The hall porter sullenly pulled a bell that rang upstairs, and turned away.
"Princess Drubetskaya to see Prince Vasili Sergeevich," he called to a footman
dressed in knee breeches, shoes, and a swallow-tail coat, who ran downstairs
and looked over from the halfway landing.
The mother smoothed the folds of her dyed silk dress before a large Venetian
mirror in the wall, and in her trodden-down shoes briskly ascended the
carpeted stairs.
"My dear," she said to her son, once more stimulating him by a touch, "you
promised me!"
The son, lowering his eyes, followed her quietly.
They entered the large hall, from which one of the doors led to the apartments
assigned to Prince Vasili.
Just as the mother and son, having reached the middle of the hall, were about
to ask their way of an elderly footman who had sprung up as they entered, the
bronze handle of one of the doors turned and Prince Vasili came out—wearing
a velvet coat with a single star on his breast, as was his custom when at home
—taking leave of a good-looking, dark-haired man. This was the celebrated
Petersburg doctor, Lorrain.
"Then it is certain?" said the prince.
"Prince, humanum est errare, * but..." replied the doctor, swallowing his r's,
and pronouncing the Latin words with a French accent.
* To err is human.
"Very well, very well..."
Seeing Anna Mikhaylovna and her son, Prince Vasili dismissed the doctor
with a bow and approached them silently and with a look of inquiry. The son
noticed that an expression of profound sorrow suddenly clouded his mother's
face, and he smiled slightly.
"Ah, Prince! In what sad circumstances we meet again! And how is our dear
invalid?" said she, as though unaware of the cold offensive look fixed on her.
Prince Vasili stared at her and at Boris questioningly and perplexed. Boris
bowed politely. Prince Vasili without acknowledging the bow turned to Anna
Mikhaylovna, answering her query by a movement of the head and lips
indicating very little hope for the patient.
"Is it possible?" exclaimed Anna Mikhaylovna. "Oh, how awful! It is terrible
to think.... This is my son," she added, indicating Boris. "He wanted to thank
you himself."
Boris bowed again politely.
"Believe me, Prince, a mother's heart will never forget what you have done for
us."
"I am glad I was able to do you a service, my dear Anna Mikhaylovna," said
Prince Vasili, arranging his lace frill, and in tone and manner, here in Moscow
to Anna Mikhaylovna whom he had placed under an obligation, assuming an
air of much greater importance than he had done in Petersburg at Anna
Scherer's reception.
"Try to serve well and show yourself worthy," added he, addressing Boris with
severity. "I am glad.... Are you here on leave?" he went on in his usual tone of
indifference.
"I am awaiting orders to join my new regiment, your excellency," replied
Boris, betraying neither annoyance at the prince's brusque manner nor a desire
to enter into conversation, but speaking so quietly and respectfully that the
prince gave him a searching glance.
"Are you living with your mother?"
"I am living at Countess Rostova's," replied Boris, again adding, "your
excellency."
"That is, with Ilya Rostov who married Nataly Shinshina," said Anna
Mikhaylovna.
"I know, I know," answered Prince Vasili in his monotonous voice. "I never
could understand how Nataly made up her mind to marry that unlicked bear! A
perfectly absurd and stupid fellow, and a gambler too, I am told."
"But a very kind man, Prince," said Anna Mikhaylovna with a pathetic smile,
as though she too knew that Count Rostov deserved this censure, but asked
him not to be too hard on the poor old man. "What do the doctors say?" asked
the princess after a pause, her worn face again expressing deep sorrow.
"They give little hope," replied the prince.
"And I should so like to thank Uncle once for all his kindness to me and Boris.
He is his godson," she added, her tone suggesting that this fact ought to give
Prince Vasili much satisfaction.
Prince Vasili became thoughtful and frowned. Anna Mikhaylovna saw that he
was afraid of finding in her a rival for Count Bezukhov's fortune, and hastened
to reassure him.
"If it were not for my sincere affection and devotion to Uncle," said she,
uttering the word with peculiar assurance and unconcern, "I know his
character: noble, upright... but you see he has no one with him except the
young princesses.... They are still young...." She bent her head and continued
in a whisper: "Has he performed his final duty, Prince? How priceless are
those last moments! It can make things no worse, and it is absolutely
necessary to prepare him if he is so ill. We women, Prince," and she smiled
tenderly, "always know how to say these things. I absolutely must see him,
however painful it may be for me. I am used to suffering."
Evidently the prince understood her, and also understood, as he had done at
Anna Pavlovna's, that it would be difficult to get rid of Anna Mikhaylovna.
"Would not such a meeting be too trying for him, dear Anna Mikhaylovna?"
said he. "Let us wait until evening. The doctors are expecting a crisis."
"But one cannot delay, Prince, at such a moment! Consider that the welfare of
his soul is at stake. Ah, it is awful: the duties of a Christian..."
A door of one of the inner rooms opened and one of the princesses, the count's
niece, entered with a cold, stern face. The length of her body was strikingly
out of proportion to her short legs. Prince Vasili turned to her.
"Well, how is he?"
"Still the same; but what can you expect, this noise..." said the princess,
looking at Anna Mikhaylovna as at a stranger.
"Ah, my dear, I hardly knew you," said Anna Mikhaylovna with a happy
smile, ambling lightly up to the count's niece. "I have come, and am at your
service to help you nurse my uncle. I imagine what you have gone through,"
and she sympathetically turned up her eyes.
The princess gave no reply and did not even smile, but left the room as Anna
Mikhaylovna took off her gloves and, occupying the position she had
conquered, settled down in an armchair, inviting Prince Vasili to take a seat
beside her.
"Boris," she said to her son with a smile, "I shall go in to see the count, my
uncle; but you, my dear, had better go to Pierre meanwhile and don't forget to
give him the Rostovs' invitation. They ask him to dinner. I suppose he won't
go?" she continued, turning to the prince.
"On the contrary," replied the prince, who had plainly become depressed, "I
shall be only too glad if you relieve me of that young man.... Here he is, and
the count has not once asked for him."
He shrugged his shoulders. A footman conducted Boris down one flight of
stairs and up another, to Pierre's rooms.
CHAPTER XVI
Pierre, after all, had not managed to choose a career for himself in Petersburg,
and had been expelled from there for riotous conduct and sent to Moscow. The
story told about him at Count Rostov's was true. Pierre had taken part in tying
a policeman to a bear. He had now been for some days in Moscow and was
staying as usual at his father's house. Though he expected that the story of his
escapade would be already known in Moscow and that the ladies about his
father—who were never favorably disposed toward him—would have used it
to turn the count against him, he nevertheless on the day of his arrival went to
his father's part of the house. Entering the drawing room, where the princesses
spent most of their time, he greeted the ladies, two of whom were sitting at
embroidery frames while a third read aloud. It was the eldest who was reading
—the one who had met Anna Mikhaylovna. The two younger ones were
embroidering: both were rosy and pretty and they differed only in that one had
a little mole on her lip which made her much prettier. Pierre was received as if
he were a corpse or a leper. The eldest princess paused in her reading and
silently stared at him with frightened eyes; the second assumed precisely the
same expression; while the youngest, the one with the mole, who was of a
cheerful and lively disposition, bent over her frame to hide a smile probably
evoked by the amusing scene she foresaw. She drew her wool down through
the canvas and, scarcely able to refrain from laughing, stooped as if trying to
make out the pattern.
"How do you do, cousin?" said Pierre. "You don't recognize me?"
"I recognize you only too well, too well."
"How is the count? Can I see him?" asked Pierre, awkwardly as usual, but
unabashed.
"The count is suffering physically and mentally, and apparently you have done
your best to increase his mental sufferings."
"Can I see the count?" Pierre again asked.
"Hm.... If you wish to kill him, to kill him outright, you can see him... Olga,
go and see whether Uncle's beef tea is ready—it is almost time," she added,
giving Pierre to understand that they were busy, and busy making his father
comfortable, while evidently he, Pierre, was only busy causing him
annoyance.
Olga went out. Pierre stood looking at the sisters; then he bowed and said:
"Then I will go to my rooms. You will let me know when I can see him."
And he left the room, followed by the low but ringing laughter of the sister
with the mole.
Next day Prince Vasili had arrived and settled in the count's house. He sent for
Pierre and said to him: "My dear fellow, if you are going to behave here as you
did in Petersburg, you will end very badly; that is all I have to say to you. The
count is very, very ill, and you must not see him at all."
Since then Pierre had not been disturbed and had spent the whole time in his
rooms upstairs.
When Boris appeared at his door Pierre was pacing up and down his room,
stopping occasionally at a corner to make menacing gestures at the wall, as if
running a sword through an invisible foe, and glaring savagely over his
spectacles, and then again resuming his walk, muttering indistinct words,
shrugging his shoulders and gesticulating.
"England is done for," said he, scowling and pointing his finger at someone
unseen. "Mr. Pitt, as a traitor to the nation and to the rights of man, is
sentenced to..." But before Pierre—who at that moment imagined himself to
be Napoleon in person and to have just effected the dangerous crossing of the
Straits of Dover and captured London—could pronounce Pitt's sentence, he
saw a well-built and handsome young officer entering his room. Pierre paused.
He had left Moscow when Boris was a boy of fourteen, and had quite
forgotten him, but in his usual impulsive and hearty way he took Boris by the
hand with a friendly smile.
"Do you remember me?" asked Boris quietly with a pleasant smile. "I have
come with my mother to see the count, but it seems he is not well."
"Yes, it seems he is ill. People are always disturbing him," answered Pierre,
trying to remember who this young man was.
Boris felt that Pierre did not recognize him but did not consider it necessary to
introduce himself, and without experiencing the least embarrassment looked
Pierre straight in the face.
"Count Rostov asks you to come to dinner today," said he, after a considerable
pause which made Pierre feel uncomfortable.
"Ah, Count Rostov!" exclaimed Pierre joyfully. "Then you are his son, Ilya?
Only fancy, I didn't know you at first. Do you remember how we went to the
Sparrow Hills with Madame Jacquot?... It's such an age..."
"You are mistaken," said Boris deliberately, with a bold and slightly sarcastic
smile. "I am Boris, son of Princess Anna Mikhaylovna Drubetskaya. Rostov,
the father, is Ilya, and his son is Nicholas. I never knew any Madame Jacquot."
Pierre shook his head and arms as if attacked by mosquitoes or bees.
"Oh dear, what am I thinking about? I've mixed everything up. One has so
many relatives in Moscow! So you are Boris? Of course. Well, now we know
where we are. And what do you think of the Boulogne expedition? The
English will come off badly, you know, if Napoleon gets across the Channel. I
think the expedition is quite feasible. If only Villeneuve doesn't make a mess
of things!"
Boris knew nothing about the Boulogne expedition; he did not read the papers
and it was the first time he had heard Villeneuve's name.
"We here in Moscow are more occupied with dinner parties and scandal than
with politics," said he in his quiet ironical tone. "I know nothing about it and
have not thought about it. Moscow is chiefly busy with gossip," he continued.
"Just now they are talking about you and your father."
Pierre smiled in his good-natured way as if afraid for his companion's sake
that the latter might say something he would afterwards regret. But Boris
spoke distinctly, clearly, and dryly, looking straight into Pierre's eyes.
"Moscow has nothing else to do but gossip," Boris went on. "Everybody is
wondering to whom the count will leave his fortune, though he may perhaps
outlive us all, as I sincerely hope he will..."
"Yes, it is all very horrid," interrupted Pierre, "very horrid."
Pierre was still afraid that this officer might inadvertently say something
disconcerting to himself.
"And it must seem to you," said Boris flushing slightly, but not changing his
tone or attitude, "it must seem to you that everyone is trying to get something
out of the rich man?"
"So it does," thought Pierre.
"But I just wish to say, to avoid misunderstandings, that you are quite
mistaken if you reckon me or my mother among such people. We are very
poor, but for my own part at any rate, for the very reason that your father is
rich, I don't regard myself as a relation of his, and neither I nor my mother
would ever ask or take anything from him."
For a long time Pierre could not understand, but when he did, he jumped up
from the sofa, seized Boris under the elbow in his quick, clumsy way, and,
blushing far more than Boris, began to speak with a feeling of mingled shame
and vexation.
"Well, this is strange! Do you suppose I... who could think?... I know very
well..."
But Boris again interrupted him.
"I am glad I have spoken out fully. Perhaps you did not like it? You must
excuse me," said he, putting Pierre at ease instead of being put at ease by him,
"but I hope I have not offended you. I always make it a rule to speak out...
Well, what answer am I to take? Will you come to dinner at the Rostovs'?"
And Boris, having apparently relieved himself of an onerous duty and
extricated himself from an awkward situation and placed another in it, became
quite pleasant again.
"No, but I say," said Pierre, calming down, "you are a wonderful fellow! What
you have just said is good, very good. Of course you don't know me. We have
not met for such a long time... not since we were children. You might think
that I... I understand, quite understand. I could not have done it myself, I
should not have had the courage, but it's splendid. I am very glad to have made
your acquaintance. It's queer," he added after a pause, "that you should have
suspected me!" He began to laugh. "Well, what of it! I hope we'll get better
acquainted," and he pressed Boris' hand. "Do you know, I have not once been
in to see the count. He has not sent for me.... I am sorry for him as a man, but
what can one do?"
"And so you think Napoleon will manage to get an army across?" asked Boris
with a smile.
Pierre saw that Boris wished to change the subject, and being of the same
mind he began explaining the advantages and disadvantages of the Boulogne
expedition.
A footman came in to summon Boris—the princess was going. Pierre, in order
to make Boris' better acquaintance, promised to come to dinner, and warmly
pressing his hand looked affectionately over his spectacles into Boris' eyes.
After he had gone Pierre continued pacing up and down the room for a long
time, no longer piercing an imaginary foe with his imaginary sword, but
smiling at the remembrance of that pleasant, intelligent, and resolute young
man.
As often happens in early youth, especially to one who leads a lonely life, he
felt an unaccountable tenderness for this young man and made up his mind
that they would be friends.
Prince Vasili saw the princess off. She held a handkerchief to her eyes and her
face was tearful.
"It is dreadful, dreadful!" she was saying, "but cost me what it may I shall do
my duty. I will come and spend the night. He must not be left like this. Every
moment is precious. I can't think why his nieces put it off. Perhaps God will
help me to find a way to prepare him!... Adieu, Prince! May God support
you..."
"Adieu, ma bonne," answered Prince Vasili turning away from her.
"Oh, he is in a dreadful state," said the mother to her son when they were in
the carriage. "He hardly recognizes anybody."
"I don't understand, Mamma—what is his attitude to Pierre?" asked the son.
"The will will show that, my dear; our fate also depends on it."
"But why do you expect that he will leave us anything?"
"Ah, my dear! He is so rich, and we are so poor!"
"Well, that is hardly a sufficient reason, Mamma..."
"Oh, Heaven! How ill he is!" exclaimed the mother.
CHAPTER XVII
After Anna Mikhaylovna had driven off with her son to visit Count Cyril
Vladimirovich Bezukhov, Countess Rostova sat for a long time all alone
applying her handkerchief to her eyes. At last she rang.
"What is the matter with you, my dear?" she said crossly to the maid who kept
her waiting some minutes. "Don't you wish to serve me? Then I'll find you
another place."
The countess was upset by her friend's sorrow and humiliating poverty, and
was therefore out of sorts, a state of mind which with her always found
expression in calling her maid "my dear" and speaking to her with exaggerated
politeness.
"I am very sorry, ma'am," answered the maid.
"Ask the count to come to me."
The count came waddling in to see his wife with a rather guilty look as usual.
"Well, little countess? What a saute of game au madere we are to have, my
dear! I tasted it. The thousand rubles I paid for Taras were not ill-spent. He is
worth it!"
He sat down by his wife, his elbows on his knees and his hands ruffling his
gray hair.
"What are your commands, little countess?"
"You see, my dear... What's that mess?" she said, pointing to his waistcoat.
"It's the saute, most likely," she added with a smile. "Well, you see, Count, I
want some money."
Her face became sad.
"Oh, little countess!"... and the count began bustling to get out his pocketbook.
"I want a great deal, Count! I want five hundred rubles," and taking out her
cambric handkerchief she began wiping her husband's waistcoat.
"Yes, immediately, immediately! Hey, who's there?" he called out in a tone
only used by persons who are certain that those they call will rush to obey the
summons. "Send Dmitri to me!"
Dmitri, a man of good family who had been brought up in the count's house
and now managed all his affairs, stepped softly into the room.
"This is what I want, my dear fellow," said the count to the deferential young
man who had entered. "Bring me..." he reflected a moment, "yes, bring me
seven hundred rubles, yes! But mind, don't bring me such tattered and dirty
notes as last time, but nice clean ones for the countess."
"Yes, Dmitri, clean ones, please," said the countess, sighing deeply.
"When would you like them, your excellency?" asked Dmitri. "Allow me to
inform you... But, don't be uneasy," he added, noticing that the count was
beginning to breathe heavily and quickly which was always a sign of
approaching anger. "I was forgetting... Do you wish it brought at once?"
"Yes, yes; just so! Bring it. Give it to the countess."
"What a treasure that Dmitri is," added the count with a smile when the young
man had departed. "There is never any 'impossible' with him. That's a thing I
hate! Everything is possible."
"Ah, money, Count, money! How much sorrow it causes in the world," said
the countess. "But I am in great need of this sum."
"You, my little countess, are a notorious spendthrift," said the count, and
having kissed his wife's hand he went back to his study.
When Anna Mikhaylovna returned from Count Bezukhov's the money, all in
clean notes, was lying ready under a handkerchief on the countess' little table,
and Anna Mikhaylovna noticed that something was agitating her.
"Well, my dear?" asked the countess.
"Oh, what a terrible state he is in! One would not know him, he is so ill! I was
only there a few moments and hardly said a word..."
"Annette, for heaven's sake don't refuse me," the countess began, with a blush
that looked very strange on her thin, dignified, elderly face, and she took the
money from under the handkerchief.
Anna Mikhaylovna instantly guessed her intention and stooped to be ready to
embrace the countess at the appropriate moment.
"This is for Boris from me, for his outfit."
Anna Mikhaylovna was already embracing her and weeping. The countess
wept too. They wept because they were friends, and because they were
kindhearted, and because they—friends from childhood—had to think about
such a base thing as money, and because their youth was over.... But those
tears were pleasant to them both.
CHAPTER XVIII
Countess Rostova, with her daughters and a large number of guests, was
already seated in the drawing room. The count took the gentlemen into his
study and showed them his choice collection of Turkish pipes. From time to
time he went out to ask: "Hasn't she come yet?" They were expecting Marya
Dmitrievna Akhrosimova, known in society as le terrible dragon, a lady
distinguished not for wealth or rank, but for common sense and frank
plainness of speech. Marya Dmitrievna was known to the Imperial family as
well as to all Moscow and Petersburg, and both cities wondered at her,
laughed privately at her rudenesses, and told good stories about her, while
none the less all without exception respected and feared her.
In the count's room, which was full of tobacco smoke, they talked of war that
had been announced in a manifesto, and about the recruiting. None of them
had yet seen the manifesto, but they all knew it had appeared. The count sat on
the sofa between two guests who were smoking and talking. He neither
smoked nor talked, but bending his head first to one side and then to the other
watched the smokers with evident pleasure and listened to the conversation of
his two neighbors, whom he egged on against each other.
One of them was a sallow, clean-shaven civilian with a thin and wrinkled face,
already growing old, though he was dressed like a most fashionable young
man. He sat with his legs up on the sofa as if quite at home and, having stuck
an amber mouthpiece far into his mouth, was inhaling the smoke
spasmodically and screwing up his eyes. This was an old bachelor, Shinshin, a
cousin of the countess', a man with "a sharp tongue" as they said in Moscow
society. He seemed to be condescending to his companion. The latter, a fresh,
rosy officer of the Guards, irreproachably washed, brushed, and buttoned, held
his pipe in the middle of his mouth and with red lips gently inhaled the smoke,
letting it escape from his handsome mouth in rings. This was Lieutenant Berg,
an officer in the Semenov regiment with whom Boris was to travel to join the
army, and about whom Natasha had teased her elder sister Vera, speaking of
Berg as her "intended." The count sat between them and listened attentively.
His favorite occupation when not playing boston, a card game he was very
fond of, was that of listener, especially when he succeeded in setting two
loquacious talkers at one another.
"Well, then, old chap, mon tres honorable Alphonse Karlovich," said Shinshin,
laughing ironically and mixing the most ordinary Russian expressions with the
choicest French phrases—which was a peculiarity of his speech. "Vous
comptez vous faire des rentes sur l'etat; * you want to make something out of
your company?"
* You expect to make an income out of the government.
"No, Peter Nikolaevich; I only want to show that in the cavalry the advantages
are far less than in the infantry. Just consider my own position now, Peter
Nikolaevich..."
Berg always spoke quietly, politely, and with great precision. His conversation
always related entirely to himself; he would remain calm and silent when the
talk related to any topic that had no direct bearing on himself. He could remain
silent for hours without being at all put out of countenance himself or making
others uncomfortable, but as soon as the conversation concerned himself he
would begin to talk circumstantially and with evident satisfaction.
"Consider my position, Peter Nikolaevich. Were I in the cavalry I should get
not more than two hundred rubles every four months, even with the rank of
lieutenant; but as it is I receive two hundred and thirty," said he, looking at
Shinshin and the count with a joyful, pleasant smile, as if it were obvious to
him that his success must always be the chief desire of everyone else.
"Besides that, Peter Nikolaevich, by exchanging into the Guards I shall be in a
more prominent position," continued Berg, "and vacancies occur much more
frequently in the Foot Guards. Then just think what can be done with two
hundred and thirty rubles! I even manage to put a little aside and to send
something to my father," he went on, emitting a smoke ring.
"La balance y est... * A German knows how to skin a flint, as the proverb
says," remarked Shinshin, moving his pipe to the other side of his mouth and
winking at the count.
* So that squares matters.
The count burst out laughing. The other guests seeing that Shinshin was
talking came up to listen. Berg, oblivious of irony or indifference, continued to
explain how by exchanging into the Guards he had already gained a step on
his old comrades of the Cadet Corps; how in wartime the company
commander might get killed and he, as senior in the company, might easily
succeed to the post; how popular he was with everyone in the regiment, and
how satisfied his father was with him. Berg evidently enjoyed narrating all
this, and did not seem to suspect that others, too, might have their own
interests. But all he said was so prettily sedate, and the naivete of his youthful
egotism was so obvious, that he disarmed his hearers.
"Well, my boy, you'll get along wherever you go—foot or horse—that I'll
warrant," said Shinshin, patting him on the shoulder and taking his feet off the
sofa.
Berg smiled joyously. The count, by his guests, went into the drawing room.
It was just the moment before a big dinner when the assembled guests,
expecting the summons to zakuska, * avoid engaging in any long conversation
but think it necessary to move about and talk, in order to show that they are
not at all impatient for their food. The host and hostess look toward the door,
and now and then glance at one another, and the visitors try to guess from
these glances who, or what, they are waiting for—some important relation
who has not yet arrived, or a dish that is not yet ready.
* Hors d'oeuvres.
Pierre had come just at dinnertime and was sitting awkwardly in the middle of
the drawing room on the first chair he had come across, blocking the way for
everyone. The countess tried to make him talk, but he went on naively looking
around through his spectacles as if in search of somebody and answered all her
questions in monosyllables. He was in the way and was the only one who did
not notice the fact. Most of the guests, knowing of the affair with the bear,
looked with curiosity at this big, stout, quiet man, wondering how such a
clumsy, modest fellow could have played such a prank on a policeman.
"You have only lately arrived?" the countess asked him.
"Oui, madame," replied he, looking around him.
"You have not yet seen my husband?"
"Non, madame." He smiled quite inappropriately.
"You have been in Paris recently, I believe? I suppose it's very interesting."
"Very interesting."
The countess exchanged glances with Anna Mikhaylovna. The latter
understood that she was being asked to entertain this young man, and sitting
down beside him she began to speak about his father; but he answered her, as
he had the countess, only in monosyllables. The other guests were all
conversing with one another. "The Razumovskis... It was charming... You are
very kind... Countess Apraksina..." was heard on all sides. The countess rose
and went into the ballroom.
"Marya Dmitrievna?" came her voice from there.
"Herself," came the answer in a rough voice, and Marya Dmitrievna entered
the room.
All the unmarried ladies and even the married ones except the very oldest rose.
Marya Dmitrievna paused at the door. Tall and stout, holding high her fiftyyear-old head with its gray curls, she stood surveying the guests, and leisurely
arranged her wide sleeves as if rolling them up. Marya Dmitrievna always
spoke in Russian.
"Health and happiness to her whose name day we are keeping and to her
children," she said, in her loud, full-toned voice which drowned all others.
"Well, you old sinner," she went on, turning to the count who was kissing her
hand, "you're feeling dull in Moscow, I daresay? Nowhere to hunt with your
dogs? But what is to be done, old man? Just see how these nestlings are
growing up," and she pointed to the girls. "You must look for husbands for
them whether you like it or not...."
"Well," said she, "how's my Cossack?" (Marya Dmitrievna always called
Natasha a Cossack) and she stroked the child's arm as she came up fearless
and gay to kiss her hand. "I know she's a scamp of a girl, but I like her."
She took a pair of pear-shaped ruby earrings from her huge reticule and,
having given them to the rosy Natasha, who beamed with the pleasure of her
saint's-day fete, turned away at once and addressed herself to Pierre.
"Eh, eh, friend! Come here a bit," said she, assuming a soft high tone of voice.
"Come here, my friend..." and she ominously tucked up her sleeves still
higher. Pierre approached, looking at her in a childlike way through his
spectacles.
"Come nearer, come nearer, friend! I used to be the only one to tell your father
the truth when he was in favor, and in your case it's my evident duty." She
paused. All were silent, expectant of what was to follow, for this was clearly
only a prelude.
"A fine lad! My word! A fine lad!... His father lies on his deathbed and he
amuses himself setting a policeman astride a bear! For shame, sir, for shame!
It would be better if you went to the war."
She turned away and gave her hand to the count, who could hardly keep from
laughing.
"Well, I suppose it is time we were at table?" said Marya Dmitrievna.
The count went in first with Marya Dmitrievna, the countess followed on the
arm of a colonel of hussars, a man of importance to them because Nicholas
was to go with him to the regiment; then came Anna Mikhaylovna with
Shinshin. Berg gave his arm to Vera. The smiling Julie Karagina went in with
Nicholas. After them other couples followed, filling the whole dining hall, and
last of all the children, tutors, and governesses followed singly. The footmen
began moving about, chairs scraped, the band struck up in the gallery, and the
guests settled down in their places. Then the strains of the count's household
band were replaced by the clatter of knives and forks, the voices of visitors,
and the soft steps of the footmen. At one end of the table sat the countess with
Marya Dmitrievna on her right and Anna Mikhaylovna on her left, the other
lady visitors were farther down. At the other end sat the count, with the hussar
colonel on his left and Shinshin and the other male visitors on his right.
Midway down the long table on one side sat the grownup young people: Vera
beside Berg, and Pierre beside Boris; and on the other side, the children,
tutors, and governesses. From behind the crystal decanters and fruit vases, the
count kept glancing at his wife and her tall cap with its light-blue ribbons, and
busily filled his neighbors' glasses, not neglecting his own. The countess in
turn, without omitting her duties as hostess, threw significant glances from
behind the pineapples at her husband whose face and bald head seemed by
their redness to contrast more than usual with his gray hair. At the ladies' end
an even chatter of voices was heard all the time, at the men's end the voices
sounded louder and louder, especially that of the colonel of hussars who,
growing more and more flushed, ate and drank so much that the count held
him up as a pattern to the other guests. Berg with tender smiles was saying to
Vera that love is not an earthly but a heavenly feeling. Boris was telling his
new friend Pierre who the guests were and exchanging glances with Natasha,
who was sitting opposite. Pierre spoke little but examined the new faces, and
ate a great deal. Of the two soups he chose turtle with savory patties and went
on to the game without omitting a single dish or one of the wines. These latter
the butler thrust mysteriously forward, wrapped in a napkin, from behind the
next man's shoulders and whispered: "Dry Madeira"... "Hungarian"... or
"Rhine wine" as the case might be. Of the four crystal glasses engraved with
the count's monogram that stood before his plate, Pierre held out one at
random and drank with enjoyment, gazing with ever-increasing amiability at
the other guests. Natasha, who sat opposite, was looking at Boris as girls of
thirteen look at the boy they are in love with and have just kissed for the first
time. Sometimes that same look fell on Pierre, and that funny lively little girl's
look made him inclined to laugh without knowing why.
Nicholas sat at some distance from Sonya, beside Julie Karagina, to whom he
was again talking with the same involuntary smile. Sonya wore a company
smile but was evidently tormented by jealousy; now she turned pale, now
blushed and strained every nerve to overhear what Nicholas and Julie were
saying to one another. The governess kept looking round uneasily as if
preparing to resent any slight that might be put upon the children. The German
tutor was trying to remember all the dishes, wines, and kinds of dessert, in
order to send a full description of the dinner to his people in Germany; and he
felt greatly offended when the butler with a bottle wrapped in a napkin passed
him by. He frowned, trying to appear as if he did not want any of that wine,
but was mortified because no one would understand that it was not to quench
his thirst or from greediness that he wanted it, but simply from a conscientious
desire for knowledge.
CHAPTER XIX
At the men's end of the table the talk grew more and more animated. The
colonel told them that the declaration of war had already appeared in
Petersburg and that a copy, which he had himself seen, had that day been
forwarded by courier to the commander-in-chief.
"And why the deuce are we going to fight Bonaparte?" remarked Shinshin.
"He has stopped Austria's cackle and I fear it will be our turn next."
The colonel was a stout, tall, plethoric German, evidently devoted to the
service and patriotically Russian. He resented Shinshin's remark.
"It is for the reasson, my goot sir," said he, speaking with a German accent,
"for the reasson zat ze Emperor knows zat. He declares in ze manifessto zat he
cannot fiew wiz indifference ze danger vreatening Russia and zat ze safety and
dignity of ze Empire as vell as ze sanctity of its alliances..." he spoke this last
word with particular emphasis as if in it lay the gist of the matter.
Then with the unerring official memory that characterized him he repeated
from the opening words of the manifesto:
... and the wish, which constitutes the Emperor's sole and absolute aim—to
establish peace in Europe on firm foundations—has now decided him to
despatch part of the army abroad and to create a new condition for the
attainment of that purpose.
"Zat, my dear sir, is vy..." he concluded, drinking a tumbler of wine with
dignity and looking to the count for approval.
"Connaissez-vous le Proverbe: * 'Jerome, Jerome, do not roam, but turn
spindles at home!'?" said Shinshin, puckering his brows and smiling. "Cela
nous convient a merveille.*(2) Suvorov now—he knew what he was about; yet
they beat him a plate couture,*(3) and where are we to find Suvorovs now? Je
vous demande un peu,"*(4) said he, continually changing from French to
Russian.
*Do you know the proverb?
*(2) That suits us down to the ground.
*(3) Hollow.
*(4) I just ask you that.
"Ve must vight to the last tr-r-op of our plood!" said the colonel, thumping the
table; "and ve must tie for our Emperor, and zen all vill pe vell. And ve must
discuss it as little as po-o-ossible"... he dwelt particularly on the word
possible... "as po-o-ossible," he ended, again turning to the count. "Zat is how
ve old hussars look at it, and zere's an end of it! And how do you, a young
man and a young hussar, how do you judge of it?" he added, addressing
Nicholas, who when he heard that the war was being discussed had turned
from his partner with eyes and ears intent on the colonel.
"I am quite of your opinion," replied Nicholas, flaming up, turning his plate
round and moving his wineglasses about with as much decision and
desperation as though he were at that moment facing some great danger. "I am
convinced that we Russians must die or conquer," he concluded, conscious—
as were others—after the words were uttered that his remarks were too
enthusiastic and emphatic for the occasion and were therefore awkward.
"What you said just now was splendid!" said his partner Julie.
Sonya trembled all over and blushed to her ears and behind them and down to
her neck and shoulders while Nicholas was speaking.
Pierre listened to the colonel's speech and nodded approvingly.
"That's fine," said he.
"The young man's a real hussar!" shouted the colonel, again thumping the
table.
"What are you making such a noise about over there?" Marya Dmitrievna's
deep voice suddenly inquired from the other end of the table. "What are you
thumping the table for?" she demanded of the hussar, "and why are you
exciting yourself? Do you think the French are here?"
"I am speaking ze truce," replied the hussar with a smile.
"It's all about the war," the count shouted down the table. "You know my son's
going, Marya Dmitrievna? My son is going."
"I have four sons in the army but still I don't fret. It is all in God's hands. You
may die in your bed or God may spare you in a battle," replied Marya
Dmitrievna's deep voice, which easily carried the whole length of the table.
"That's true!"
Once more the conversations concentrated, the ladies' at the one end and the
men's at the other.
"You won't ask," Natasha's little brother was saying; "I know you won't ask!"
"I will," replied Natasha.
Her face suddenly flushed with reckless and joyous resolution. She half rose,
by a glance inviting Pierre, who sat opposite, to listen to what was coming,
and turning to her mother:
"Mamma!" rang out the clear contralto notes of her childish voice, audible the
whole length of the table.
"What is it?" asked the countess, startled; but seeing by her daughter's face
that it was only mischief, she shook a finger at her sternly with a threatening
and forbidding movement of her head.
The conversation was hushed.
"Mamma! What sweets are we going to have?" and Natasha's voice sounded
still more firm and resolute.
The countess tried to frown, but could not. Marya Dmitrievna shook her fat
finger.
"Cossack!" she said threateningly.
Most of the guests, uncertain how to regard this sally, looked at the elders.
"You had better take care!" said the countess.
"Mamma! What sweets are we going to have?" Natasha again cried boldly,
with saucy gaiety, confident that her prank would be taken in good part.
Sonya and fat little Petya doubled up with laughter.
"You see! I have asked," whispered Natasha to her little brother and to Pierre,
glancing at him again.
"Ice pudding, but you won't get any," said Marya Dmitrievna.
Natasha saw there was nothing to be afraid of and so she braved even Marya
Dmitrievna.
"Marya Dmitrievna! What kind of ice pudding? I don't like ice cream."
"Carrot ices."
"No! What kind, Marya Dmitrievna? What kind?" she almost screamed; "I
want to know!"
Marya Dmitrievna and the countess burst out laughing, and all the guests
joined in. Everyone laughed, not at Marya Dmitrievna's answer but at the
incredible boldness and smartness of this little girl who had dared to treat
Marya Dmitrievna in this fashion.
Natasha only desisted when she had been told that there would be pineapple
ice. Before the ices, champagne was served round. The band again struck up,
the count and countess kissed, and the guests, leaving their seats, went up to
"congratulate" the countess, and reached across the table to clink glasses with
the count, with the children, and with one another. Again the footmen rushed
about, chairs scraped, and in the same order in which they had entered but
with redder faces, the guests returned to the drawing room and to the count's
study.
CHAPTER XX
The card tables were drawn out, sets made up for boston, and the count's
visitors settled themselves, some in the two drawing rooms, some in the sitting
room, some in the library.
The count, holding his cards fanwise, kept himself with difficulty from
dropping into his usual after-dinner nap, and laughed at everything. The young
people, at the countess' instigation, gathered round the clavichord and harp.
Julie by general request played first. After she had played a little air with
variations on the harp, she joined the other young ladies in begging Natasha
and Nicholas, who were noted for their musical talent, to sing something.
Natasha, who was treated as though she were grown up, was evidently very
proud of this but at the same time felt shy.
"What shall we sing?" she said.
"'The Brook,'" suggested Nicholas.
"Well, then, let's be quick. Boris, come here," said Natasha. "But where is
Sonya?"
She looked round and seeing that her friend was not in the room ran to look
for her.
Running into Sonya's room and not finding her there, Natasha ran to the
nursery, but Sonya was not there either. Natasha concluded that she must be on
the chest in the passage. The chest in the passage was the place of mourning
for the younger female generation in the Rostov household. And there in fact
was Sonya lying face downward on Nurse's dirty feather bed on the top of the
chest, crumpling her gauzy pink dress under her, hiding her face with her
slender fingers, and sobbing so convulsively that her bare little shoulders
shook. Natasha's face, which had been so radiantly happy all that saint's day,
suddenly changed: her eyes became fixed, and then a shiver passed down her
broad neck and the corners of her mouth drooped.
"Sonya! What is it? What is the matter?... Oo... Oo... Oo...!" And Natasha's
large mouth widened, making her look quite ugly, and she began to wail like a
baby without knowing why, except that Sonya was crying. Sonya tried to lift
her head to answer but could not, and hid her face still deeper in the bed.
Natasha wept, sitting on the blue-striped feather bed and hugging her friend.
With an effort Sonya sat up and began wiping her eyes and explaining.
"Nicholas is going away in a week's time, his... papers... have come... he told
me himself... but still I should not cry," and she showed a paper she held in her
hand—with the verses Nicholas had written, "still, I should not cry, but you
can't... no one can understand... what a soul he has!"
And she began to cry again because he had such a noble soul.
"It's all very well for you... I am not envious... I love you and Boris also," she
went on, gaining a little strength; "he is nice... there are no difficulties in your
way.... But Nicholas is my cousin... one would have to... the Metropolitan
himself... and even then it can't be done. And besides, if she tells Mamma"
(Sonya looked upon the countess as her mother and called her so) "that I am
spoiling Nicholas' career and am heartless and ungrateful, while truly... God is
my witness," and she made the sign of the cross, "I love her so much, and all
of you, only Vera... And what for? What have I done to her? I am so grateful
to you that I would willingly sacrifice everything, only I have nothing...."
Sonya could not continue, and again hid her face in her hands and in the
feather bed. Natasha began consoling her, but her face showed that she
understood all the gravity of her friend's trouble.
"Sonya," she suddenly exclaimed, as if she had guessed the true reason of her
friend's sorrow, "I'm sure Vera has said something to you since dinner? Hasn't
she?"
"Yes, these verses Nicholas wrote himself and I copied some others, and she
found them on my table and said she'd show them to Mamma, and that I was
ungrateful, and that Mamma would never allow him to marry me, but that he'll
marry Julie. You see how he's been with her all day... Natasha, what have I
done to deserve it?..."
And again she began to sob, more bitterly than before. Natasha lifted her up,
hugged her, and, smiling through her tears, began comforting her.
"Sonya, don't believe her, darling! Don't believe her! Do you remember how
we and Nicholas, all three of us, talked in the sitting room after supper? Why,
we settled how everything was to be. I don't quite remember how, but don't
you remember that it could all be arranged and how nice it all was? There's
Uncle Shinshin's brother has married his first cousin. And we are only second
cousins, you know. And Boris says it is quite possible. You know I have told
him all about it. And he is so clever and so good!" said Natasha. "Don't you
cry, Sonya, dear love, darling Sonya!" and she kissed her and laughed. "Vera's
spiteful; never mind her! And all will come right and she won't say anything to
Mamma. Nicholas will tell her himself, and he doesn't care at all for Julie."
Natasha kissed her on the hair.
Sonya sat up. The little kitten brightened, its eyes shone, and it seemed ready
to lift its tail, jump down on its soft paws, and begin playing with the ball of
worsted as a kitten should.
"Do you think so?... Really? Truly?" she said, quickly smoothing her frock and
hair.
"Really, truly!" answered Natasha, pushing in a crisp lock that had strayed
from under her friend's plaits.
Both laughed.
"Well, let's go and sing 'The Brook.'"
"Come along!"
"Do you know, that fat Pierre who sat opposite me is so funny!" said Natasha,
stopping suddenly. "I feel so happy!"
And she set off at a run along the passage.
Sonya, shaking off some down which clung to her and tucking away the verses
in the bosom of her dress close to her bony little chest, ran after Natasha down
the passage into the sitting room with flushed face and light, joyous steps. At
the visitors' request the young people sang the quartette, "The Brook," with
which everyone was delighted. Then Nicholas sang a song he had just learned:
At nighttime in the moon's fair glow
How sweet, as fancies wander free,
To feel that in this world there's one
Who still is thinking but of thee!
That while her fingers touch the harp
Wafting sweet music o'er the lea,
It is for thee thus swells her heart,
Sighing its message out to thee...
A day or two, then bliss unspoilt,
But oh! till then I cannot live!...
He had not finished the last verse before the young people began to get ready
to dance in the large hall, and the sound of the feet and the coughing of the
musicians were heard from the gallery.
Pierre was sitting in the drawing-room where Shinshin had engaged him, as a
man recently returned from abroad, in a political conversation in which several
others joined but which bored Pierre. When the music began Natasha came in
and walking straight up to Pierre said, laughing and blushing:
"Mamma told me to ask you to join the dancers."
"I am afraid of mixing the figures," Pierre replied; "but if you will be my
teacher..." And lowering his big arm he offered it to the slender little girl.
While the couples were arranging themselves and the musicians tuning up,
Pierre sat down with his little partner. Natasha was perfectly happy; she was
dancing with a grown-up man, who had been abroad. She was sitting in a
conspicuous place and talking to him like a grown-up lady. She had a fan in
her hand that one of the ladies had given her to hold. Assuming quite the pose
of a society woman (heaven knows when and where she had learned it) she
talked with her partner, fanning herself and smiling over the fan.
"Dear, dear! Just look at her!" exclaimed the countess as she crossed the
ballroom, pointing to Natasha.
Natasha blushed and laughed.
"Well, really, Mamma! Why should you? What is there to be surprised at?"
In the midst of the third ecossaise there was a clatter of chairs being pushed
back in the sitting room where the count and Marya Dmitrievna had been
playing cards with the majority of the more distinguished and older visitors.
They now, stretching themselves after sitting so long, and replacing their
purses and pocketbooks, entered the ballroom. First came Marya Dmitrievna
and the count, both with merry countenances. The count, with playful
ceremony somewhat in ballet style, offered his bent arm to Marya Dmitrievna.
He drew himself up, a smile of debonair gallantry lit up his face and as soon as
the last figure of the ecossaise was ended, he clapped his hands to the
musicians and shouted up to their gallery, addressing the first violin:
"Semen! Do you know the Daniel Cooper?"
This was the count's favorite dance, which he had danced in his youth.
(Strictly speaking, Daniel Cooper was one figure of the anglaise.)
"Look at Papa!" shouted Natasha to the whole company, and quite forgetting
that she was dancing with a grown-up partner she bent her curly head to her
knees and made the whole room ring with her laughter.
And indeed everybody in the room looked with a smile of pleasure at the
jovial old gentleman, who standing beside his tall and stout partner, Marya
Dmitrievna, curved his arms, beat time, straightened his shoulders, turned out
his toes, tapped gently with his foot, and, by a smile that broadened his round
face more and more, prepared the onlookers for what was to follow. As soon
as the provocatively gay strains of Daniel Cooper (somewhat resembling those
of a merry peasant dance) began to sound, all the doorways of the ballroom
were suddenly filled by the domestic serfs—the men on one side and the
women on the other—who with beaming faces had come to see their master
making merry.
"Just look at the master! A regular eagle he is!" loudly remarked the nurse, as
she stood in one of the doorways.
The count danced well and knew it. But his partner could not and did not want
to dance well. Her enormous figure stood erect, her powerful arms hanging
down (she had handed her reticule to the countess), and only her stern but
handsome face really joined in the dance. What was expressed by the whole of
the count's plump figure, in Marya Dmitrievna found expression only in her
more and more beaming face and quivering nose. But if the count, getting
more and more into the swing of it, charmed the spectators by the
unexpectedness of his adroit maneuvers and the agility with which he capered
about on his light feet, Marya Dmitrievna produced no less impression by
slight exertions—the least effort to move her shoulders or bend her arms when
turning, or stamp her foot—which everyone appreciated in view of her size
and habitual severity. The dance grew livelier and livelier. The other couples
could not attract a moment's attention to their own evolutions and did not even
try to do so. All were watching the count and Marya Dmitrievna. Natasha kept
pulling everyone by sleeve or dress, urging them to "look at Papa!" though as
it was they never took their eyes off the couple. In the intervals of the dance
the count, breathing deeply, waved and shouted to the musicians to play faster.
Faster, faster, and faster; lightly, more lightly, and yet more lightly whirled the
count, flying round Marya Dmitrievna, now on his toes, now on his heels;
until, turning his partner round to her seat, he executed the final pas, raising
his soft foot backwards, bowing his perspiring head, smiling and making a
wide sweep with his arm, amid a thunder of applause and laughter led by
Natasha. Both partners stood still, breathing heavily and wiping their faces
with their cambric handkerchiefs.
"That's how we used to dance in our time, ma chere," said the count.
"That was a Daniel Cooper!" exclaimed Marya Dmitrievna, tucking up her
sleeves and puffing heavily.
CHAPTER XXI
While in the Rostovs' ballroom the sixth anglaise was being danced, to a tune
in which the weary musicians blundered, and while tired footmen and cooks
were getting the supper, Count Bezukhov had a sixth stroke. The doctors
pronounced recovery impossible. After a mute confession, communion was
administered to the dying man, preparations made for the sacrament of
unction, and in his house there was the bustle and thrill of suspense usual at
such moments. Outside the house, beyond the gates, a group of undertakers,
who hid whenever a carriage drove up, waited in expectation of an important
order for an expensive funeral. The Military Governor of Moscow, who had
been assiduous in sending aides-de-camp to inquire after the count's health,
came himself that evening to bid a last farewell to the celebrated grandee of
Catherine's court, Count Bezukhov.
The magnificent reception room was crowded. Everyone stood up respectfully
when the Military Governor, having stayed about half an hour alone with the
dying man, passed out, slightly acknowledging their bows and trying to escape
as quickly as possible from the glances fixed on him by the doctors, clergy,
and relatives of the family. Prince Vasili, who had grown thinner and paler
during the last few days, escorted him to the door, repeating something to him
several times in low tones.
When the Military Governor had gone, Prince Vasili sat down all alone on a
chair in the ballroom, crossing one leg high over the other, leaning his elbow
on his knee and covering his face with his hand. After sitting so for a while he
rose, and, looking about him with frightened eyes, went with unusually hurried
steps down the long corridor leading to the back of the house, to the room of
the eldest princess.
Those who were in the dimly lit reception room spoke in nervous whispers,
and, whenever anyone went into or came from the dying man's room, grew
silent and gazed with eyes full of curiosity or expectancy at his door, which
creaked slightly when opened.
"The limits of human life... are fixed and may not be o'erpassed," said an old
priest to a lady who had taken a seat beside him and was listening naively to
his words.
"I wonder, is it not too late to administer unction?" asked the lady, adding the
priest's clerical title, as if she had no opinion of her own on the subject.
"Ah, madam, it is a great sacrament," replied the priest, passing his hand over
the thin grizzled strands of hair combed back across his bald head.
"Who was that? The Military Governor himself?" was being asked at the other
side of the room. "How young-looking he is!"
"Yes, and he is over sixty. I hear the count no longer recognizes anyone. They
wished to administer the sacrament of unction."
"I knew someone who received that sacrament seven times."
The second princess had just come from the sickroom with her eyes red from
weeping and sat down beside Dr. Lorrain, who was sitting in a graceful pose
under a portrait of Catherine, leaning his elbow on a table.
"Beautiful," said the doctor in answer to a remark about the weather. "The
weather is beautiful, Princess; and besides, in Moscow one feels as if one were
in the country."
"Yes, indeed," replied the princess with a sigh. "So he may have something to
drink?"
Lorrain considered.
"Has he taken his medicine?"
"Yes."
The doctor glanced at his watch.
"Take a glass of boiled water and put a pinch of cream of tartar," and he
indicated with his delicate fingers what he meant by a pinch.
"Dere has neffer been a gase," a German doctor was saying to an aide-decamp, "dat one liffs after de sird stroke."
"And what a well-preserved man he was!" remarked the aide-de-camp. "And
who will inherit his wealth?" he added in a whisper.
"It von't go begging," replied the German with a smile.
Everyone again looked toward the door, which creaked as the second princess
went in with the drink she had prepared according to Lorrain's instructions.
The German doctor went up to Lorrain.
"Do you think he can last till morning?" asked the German, addressing Lorrain
in French which he pronounced badly.
Lorrain, pursing up his lips, waved a severely negative finger before his nose.
"Tonight, not later," said he in a low voice, and he moved away with a
decorous smile of self-satisfaction at being able clearly to understand and state
the patient's condition.
Meanwhile Prince Vasili had opened the door into the princess' room.
In this room it was almost dark; only two tiny lamps were burning before the
icons and there was a pleasant scent of flowers and burnt pastilles. The room
was crowded with small pieces of furniture, whatnots, cupboards, and little
tables. The quilt of a high, white feather bed was just visible behind a screen.
A small dog began to bark.
"Ah, is it you, cousin?"
She rose and smoothed her hair, which was as usual so extremely smooth that
it seemed to be made of one piece with her head and covered with varnish.
"Has anything happened?" she asked. "I am so terrified."
"No, there is no change. I only came to have a talk about business, Catiche," *
muttered the prince, seating himself wearily on the chair she had just vacated.
"You have made the place warm, I must say," he remarked. "Well, sit down:
let's have a talk."
*Catherine.
"I thought perhaps something had happened," she said with her unchanging
stonily severe expression; and, sitting down opposite the prince, she prepared
to listen.
"I wished to get a nap, mon cousin, but I can't."
"Well, my dear?" said Prince Vasili, taking her hand and bending it
downwards as was his habit.
It was plain that this "well?" referred to much that they both understood
without naming.
The princess, who had a straight, rigid body, abnormally long for her legs,
looked directly at Prince Vasili with no sign of emotion in her prominent gray
eyes. Then she shook her head and glanced up at the icons with a sigh. This
might have been taken as an expression of sorrow and devotion, or of
weariness and hope of resting before long. Prince Vasili understood it as an
expression of weariness.
"And I?" he said; "do you think it is easier for me? I am as worn out as a post
horse, but still I must have a talk with you, Catiche, a very serious talk."
Prince Vasili said no more and his cheeks began to twitch nervously, now on
one side, now on the other, giving his face an unpleasant expression which
was never to be seen on it in a drawing room. His eyes too seemed strange; at
one moment they looked impudently sly and at the next glanced round in
alarm.
The princess, holding her little dog on her lap with her thin bony hands,
looked attentively into Prince Vasili's eyes evidently resolved not to be the
first to break silence, if she had to wait till morning.
"Well, you see, my dear princess and cousin, Catherine Semenovna,"
continued Prince Vasili, returning to his theme, apparently not without an
inner struggle; "at such a moment as this one must think of everything. One
must think of the future, of all of you... I love you all, like children of my own,
as you know."
The princess continued to look at him without moving, and with the same dull
expression.
"And then of course my family has also to be considered," Prince Vasili went
on, testily pushing away a little table without looking at her. "You know,
Catiche, that we—you three sisters, Mamontov, and my wife—are the count's
only direct heirs. I know, I know how hard it is for you to talk or think of such
matters. It is no easier for me; but, my dear, I am getting on for sixty and must
be prepared for anything. Do you know I have sent for Pierre? The count,"
pointing to his portrait, "definitely demanded that he should be called."
Prince Vasili looked questioningly at the princess, but could not make out
whether she was considering what he had just said or whether she was simply
looking at him.
"There is one thing I constantly pray God to grant, mon cousin," she replied,
"and it is that He would be merciful to him and would allow his noble soul
peacefully to leave this..."
"Yes, yes, of course," interrupted Prince Vasili impatiently, rubbing his bald
head and angrily pulling back toward him the little table that he had pushed
away. "But... in short, the fact is... you know yourself that last winter the count
made a will by which he left all his property, not to us his direct heirs, but to
Pierre."
"He has made wills enough!" quietly remarked the princess. "But he cannot
leave the estate to Pierre. Pierre is illegitimate."
"But, my dear," said Prince Vasili suddenly, clutching the little table and
becoming more animated and talking more rapidly: "what if a letter has been
written to the Emperor in which the count asks for Pierre's legitimation? Do
you understand that in consideration of the count's services, his request would
be granted?..."
The princess smiled as people do who think they know more about the subject
under discussion than those they are talking with.
"I can tell you more," continued Prince Vasili, seizing her hand, "that letter
was written, though it was not sent, and the Emperor knew of it. The only
question is, has it been destroyed or not? If not, then as soon as all is over,"
and Prince Vasili sighed to intimate what he meant by the words all is over,
"and the count's papers are opened, the will and letter will be delivered to the
Emperor, and the petition will certainly be granted. Pierre will get everything
as the legitimate son."
"And our share?" asked the princess smiling ironically, as if anything might
happen, only not that.
"But, my poor Catiche, it is as clear as daylight! He will then be the legal heir
to everything and you won't get anything. You must know, my dear, whether
the will and letter were written, and whether they have been destroyed or not.
And if they have somehow been overlooked, you ought to know where they
are, and must find them, because..."
"What next?" the princess interrupted, smiling sardonically and not changing
the expression of her eyes. "I am a woman, and you think we are all stupid;
but I know this: an illegitimate son cannot inherit... un batard!" * she added, as
if supposing that this translation of the word would effectively prove to Prince
Vasili the invalidity of his contention.
* A bastard.
"Well, really, Catiche! Can't you understand! You are so intelligent, how is it
you don't see that if the count has written a letter to the Emperor begging him
to recognize Pierre as legitimate, it follows that Pierre will not be Pierre but
will become Count Bezukhov, and will then inherit everything under the will?
And if the will and letter are not destroyed, then you will have nothing but the
consolation of having been dutiful et tout ce qui s'ensuit! * That's certain."
* And all that follows therefrom.
"I know the will was made, but I also know that it is invalid; and you, mon
cousin, seem to consider me a perfect fool," said the princess with the
expression women assume when they suppose they are saying something witty
and stinging.
"My dear Princess Catherine Semenovna," began Prince Vasili impatiently, "I
came here not to wrangle with you, but to talk about your interests as with a
kinswoman, a good, kind, true relation. And I tell you for the tenth time that if
the letter to the Emperor and the will in Pierre's favor are among the count's
papers, then, my dear girl, you and your sisters are not heiresses! If you don't
believe me, then believe an expert. I have just been talking to Dmitri
Onufrich" (the family solicitor) "and he says the same."
At this a sudden change evidently took place in the princess' ideas; her thin
lips grew white, though her eyes did not change, and her voice when she
began to speak passed through such transitions as she herself evidently did not
expect.
"That would be a fine thing!" said she. "I never wanted anything and I don't
now."
She pushed the little dog off her lap and smoothed her dress.
"And this is gratitude—this is recognition for those who have sacrificed
everything for his sake!" she cried. "It's splendid! Fine! I don't want anything,
Prince."
"Yes, but you are not the only one. There are your sisters..." replied Prince
Vasili.
But the princess did not listen to him.
"Yes, I knew it long ago but had forgotten. I knew that I could expect nothing
but meanness, deceit, envy, intrigue, and ingratitude—the blackest ingratitude
—in this house..."
"Do you or do you not know where that will is?" insisted Prince Vasili, his
cheeks twitching more than ever.
"Yes, I was a fool! I still believed in people, loved them, and sacrificed myself.
But only the base, the vile succeed! I know who has been intriguing!"
The princess wished to rise, but the prince held her by the hand. She had the
air of one who has suddenly lost faith in the whole human race. She gave her
companion an angry glance.
"There is still time, my dear. You must remember, Catiche, that it was all done
casually in a moment of anger, of illness, and was afterwards forgotten. Our
duty, my dear, is to rectify his mistake, to ease his last moments by not letting
him commit this injustice, and not to let him die feeling that he is rendering
unhappy those who..."
"Who sacrificed everything for him," chimed in the princess, who would again
have risen had not the prince still held her fast, "though he never could
appreciate it. No, mon cousin," she added with a sigh, "I shall always
remember that in this world one must expect no reward, that in this world
there is neither honor nor justice. In this world one has to be cunning and
cruel."
"Now come, come! Be reasonable. I know your excellent heart."
"No, I have a wicked heart."
"I know your heart," repeated the prince. "I value your friendship and wish
you to have as good an opinion of me. Don't upset yourself, and let us talk
sensibly while there is still time, be it a day or be it but an hour.... Tell me all
you know about the will, and above all where it is. You must know. We will
take it at once and show it to the count. He has, no doubt, forgotten it and will
wish to destroy it. You understand that my sole desire is conscientiously to
carry out his wishes; that is my only reason for being here. I came simply to
help him and you."
"Now I see it all! I know who has been intriguing—I know!" cried the
princess.
"That's not the point, my dear."
"It's that protege of yours, that sweet Princess Drubetskaya, that Anna
Mikhaylovna whom I would not take for a housemaid... the infamous, vile
woman!"
"Do not let us lose any time..."
"Ah, don't talk to me! Last winter she wheedled herself in here and told the
count such vile, disgraceful things about us, especially about Sophie—I can't
repeat them—that it made the count quite ill and he would not see us for a
whole fortnight. I know it was then he wrote this vile, infamous paper, but I
thought the thing was invalid."
"We've got to it at last—why did you not tell me about it sooner?"
"It's in the inlaid portfolio that he keeps under his pillow," said the princess,
ignoring his question. "Now I know! Yes; if I have a sin, a great sin, it is
hatred of that vile woman!" almost shrieked the princess, now quite changed.
"And what does she come worming herself in here for? But I will give her a
piece of my mind. The time will come!"
CHAPTER XXII
While these conversations were going on in the reception room and the
princess' room, a carriage containing Pierre (who had been sent for) and Anna
Mikhaylovna (who found it necessary to accompany him) was driving into the
court of Count Bezukhov's house. As the wheels rolled softly over the straw
beneath the windows, Anna Mikhaylovna, having turned with words of
comfort to her companion, realized that he was asleep in his corner and woke
him up. Rousing himself, Pierre followed Anna Mikhaylovna out of the
carriage, and only then began to think of the interview with his dying father
which awaited him. He noticed that they had not come to the front entrance
but to the back door. While he was getting down from the carriage steps two
men, who looked like tradespeople, ran hurriedly from the entrance and hid in
the shadow of the wall. Pausing for a moment, Pierre noticed several other
men of the same kind hiding in the shadow of the house on both sides. But
neither Anna Mikhaylovna nor the footman nor the coachman, who could not
help seeing these people, took any notice of them. "It seems to be all right,"
Pierre concluded, and followed Anna Mikhaylovna. She hurriedly ascended
the narrow dimly lit stone staircase, calling to Pierre, who was lagging behind,
to follow. Though he did not see why it was necessary for him to go to the
count at all, still less why he had to go by the back stairs, yet judging by Anna
Mikhaylovna's air of assurance and haste, Pierre concluded that it was all
absolutely necessary. Halfway up the stairs they were almost knocked over by
some men who, carrying pails, came running downstairs, their boots clattering.
These men pressed close to the wall to let Pierre and Anna Mikhaylovna pass
and did not evince the least surprise at seeing them there.
"Is this the way to the princesses' apartments?" asked Anna Mikhaylovna of
one of them.
"Yes," replied a footman in a bold loud voice, as if anything were now
permissible; "the door to the left, ma'am."
"Perhaps the count did not ask for me," said Pierre when he reached the
landing. "I'd better go to my own room."
Anna Mikhaylovna paused and waited for him to come up.
"Ah, my friend!" she said, touching his arm as she had done her son's when
speaking to him that afternoon, "believe me I suffer no less than you do, but be
a man!"
"But really, hadn't I better go away?" he asked, looking kindly at her over his
spectacles.
"Ah, my dear friend! Forget the wrongs that may have been done you. Think
that he is your father... perhaps in the agony of death." She sighed. "I have
loved you like a son from the first. Trust yourself to me, Pierre. I shall not
forget your interests."
Pierre did not understand a word, but the conviction that all this had to be
grew stronger, and he meekly followed Anna Mikhaylovna who was already
opening a door.
This door led into a back anteroom. An old man, a servant of the princesses,
sat in a corner knitting a stocking. Pierre had never been in this part of the
house and did not even know of the existence of these rooms. Anna
Mikhaylovna, addressing a maid who was hurrying past with a decanter on a
tray as "my dear" and "my sweet," asked about the princess' health and then
led Pierre along a stone passage. The first door on the left led into the
princesses' apartments. The maid with the decanter in her haste had not closed
the door (everything in the house was done in haste at that time), and Pierre
and Anna Mikhaylovna in passing instinctively glanced into the room, where
Prince Vasili and the eldest princess were sitting close together talking. Seeing
them pass, Prince Vasili drew back with obvious impatience, while the
princess jumped up and with a gesture of desperation slammed the door with
all her might.
This action was so unlike her usual composure and the fear depicted on Prince
Vasili's face so out of keeping with his dignity that Pierre stopped and glanced
inquiringly over his spectacles at his guide. Anna Mikhaylovna evinced no
surprise, she only smiled faintly and sighed, as if to say that this was no more
than she had expected.
"Be a man, my friend. I will look after your interests," said she in reply to his
look, and went still faster along the passage.
Pierre could not make out what it was all about, and still less what "watching
over his interests" meant, but he decided that all these things had to be. From
the passage they went into a large, dimly lit room adjoining the count's
reception room. It was one of those sumptuous but cold apartments known to
Pierre only from the front approach, but even in this room there now stood an
empty bath, and water had been spilled on the carpet. They were met by a
deacon with a censer and by a servant who passed out on tiptoe without
heeding them. They went into the reception room familiar to Pierre, with two
Italian windows opening into the conservatory, with its large bust and full
length portrait of Catherine the Great. The same people were still sitting here
in almost the same positions as before, whispering to one another. All became
silent and turned to look at the pale tear-worn Anna Mikhaylovna as she
entered, and at the big stout figure of Pierre who, hanging his head, meekly
followed her.
Anna Mikhaylovna's face expressed a consciousness that the decisive moment
had arrived. With the air of a practical Petersburg lady she now, keeping Pierre
close beside her, entered the room even more boldly than that afternoon. She
felt that as she brought with her the person the dying man wished to see, her
own admission was assured. Casting a rapid glance at all those in the room
and noticing the count's confessor there, she glided up to him with a sort of
amble, not exactly bowing yet seeming to grow suddenly smaller, and
respectfully received the blessing first of one and then of another priest.
"God be thanked that you are in time," said she to one of the priests; "all we
relatives have been in such anxiety. This young man is the count's son," she
added more softly. "What a terrible moment!"
Having said this she went up to the doctor.
"Dear doctor," said she, "this young man is the count's son. Is there any hope?"
The doctor cast a rapid glance upwards and silently shrugged his shoulders.
Anna Mikhaylovna with just the same movement raised her shoulders and
eyes, almost closing the latter, sighed, and moved away from the doctor to
Pierre. To him, in a particularly respectful and tenderly sad voice, she said:
"Trust in His mercy!" and pointing out a small sofa for him to sit and wait for
her, she went silently toward the door that everyone was watching and it
creaked very slightly as she disappeared behind it.
Pierre, having made up his mind to obey his monitress implicitly, moved
toward the sofa she had indicated. As soon as Anna Mikhaylovna had
disappeared he noticed that the eyes of all in the room turned to him with
something more than curiosity and sympathy. He noticed that they whispered
to one another, casting significant looks at him with a kind of awe and even
servility. A deference such as he had never before received was shown him. A
strange lady, the one who had been talking to the priests, rose and offered him
her seat; an aide-de-camp picked up and returned a glove Pierre had dropped;
the doctors became respectfully silent as he passed by, and moved to make
way for him. At first Pierre wished to take another seat so as not to trouble the
lady, and also to pick up the glove himself and to pass round the doctors who
were not even in his way; but all at once he felt that this would not do, and that
tonight he was a person obliged to perform some sort of awful rite which
everyone expected of him, and that he was therefore bound to accept their
services. He took the glove in silence from the aide-de-camp, and sat down in
the lady's chair, placing his huge hands symmetrically on his knees in the
naive attitude of an Egyptian statue, and decided in his own mind that all was
as it should be, and that in order not to lose his head and do foolish things he
must not act on his own ideas tonight, but must yield himself up entirely to the
will of those who were guiding him.
Not two minutes had passed before Prince Vasili with head erect majestically
entered the room. He was wearing his long coat with three stars on his breast.
He seemed to have grown thinner since the morning; his eyes seemed larger
than usual when he glanced round and noticed Pierre. He went up to him, took
his hand (a thing he never used to do), and drew it downwards as if wishing to
ascertain whether it was firmly fixed on.
"Courage, courage, my friend! He has asked to see you. That is well!" and he
turned to go.
But Pierre thought it necessary to ask: "How is..." and hesitated, not knowing
whether it would be proper to call the dying man "the count," yet ashamed to
call him "father."
"He had another stroke about half an hour ago. Courage, my friend..."
Pierre's mind was in such a confused state that the word "stroke" suggested to
him a blow from something. He looked at Prince Vasili in perplexity, and only
later grasped that a stroke was an attack of illness. Prince Vasili said
something to Lorrain in passing and went through the door on tiptoe. He could
not walk well on tiptoe and his whole body jerked at each step. The eldest
princess followed him, and the priests and deacons and some servants also
went in at the door. Through that door was heard a noise of things being
moved about, and at last Anna Mikhaylovna, still with the same expression,
pale but resolute in the discharge of duty, ran out and touching Pierre lightly
on the arm said:
"The divine mercy is inexhaustible! Unction is about to be administered.
Come."
Pierre went in at the door, stepping on the soft carpet, and noticed that the
strange lady, the aide-de-camp, and some of the servants, all followed him in,
as if there were now no further need for permission to enter that room.
CHAPTER XXIII
Pierre well knew this large room divided by columns and an arch, its walls
hung round with Persian carpets. The part of the room behind the columns,
with a high silk-curtained mahogany bedstead on one side and on the other an
immense case containing icons, was brightly illuminated with red light like a
Russian church during evening service. Under the gleaming icons stood a long
invalid chair, and in that chair on snowy-white smooth pillows, evidently
freshly changed, Pierre saw—covered to the waist by a bright green quilt—the
familiar, majestic figure of his father, Count Bezukhov, with that gray mane of
hair above his broad forehead which reminded one of a lion, and the deep
characteristically noble wrinkles of his handsome, ruddy face. He lay just
under the icons; his large thick hands outside the quilt. Into the right hand,
which was lying palm downwards, a wax taper had been thrust between
forefinger and thumb, and an old servant, bending over from behind the chair,
held it in position. By the chair stood the priests, their long hair falling over
their magnificent glittering vestments, with lighted tapers in their hands,
slowly and solemnly conducting the service. A little behind them stood the
two younger princesses holding handkerchiefs to their eyes, and just in front
of them their eldest sister, Catiche, with a vicious and determined look steadily
fixed on the icons, as though declaring to all that she could not answer for
herself should she glance round. Anna Mikhaylovna, with a meek, sorrowful,
and all-forgiving expression on her face, stood by the door near the strange
lady. Prince Vasili in front of the door, near the invalid chair, a wax taper in his
left hand, was leaning his left arm on the carved back of a velvet chair he had
turned round for the purpose, and was crossing himself with his right hand,
turning his eyes upward each time he touched his forehead. His face wore a
calm look of piety and resignation to the will of God. "If you do not
understand these sentiments," he seemed to be saying, "so much the worse for
you!"
Behind him stood the aide-de-camp, the doctors, and the menservants; the men
and women had separated as in church. All were silently crossing themselves,
and the reading of the church service, the subdued chanting of deep bass
voices, and in the intervals sighs and the shuffling of feet were the only sounds
that could be heard. Anna Mikhaylovna, with an air of importance that showed
that she felt she quite knew what she was about, went across the room to
where Pierre was standing and gave him a taper. He lit it and, distracted by
observing those around him, began crossing himself with the hand that held
the taper.
Sophie, the rosy, laughter-loving, youngest princess with the mole, watched
him. She smiled, hid her face in her handkerchief, and remained with it hidden
for awhile; then looking up and seeing Pierre she again began to laugh. She
evidently felt unable to look at him without laughing, but could not resist
looking at him: so to be out of temptation she slipped quietly behind one of the
columns. In the midst of the service the voices of the priests suddenly ceased,
they whispered to one another, and the old servant who was holding the
count's hand got up and said something to the ladies. Anna Mikhaylovna
stepped forward and, stooping over the dying man, beckoned to Lorrain from
behind her back. The French doctor held no taper; he was leaning against one
of the columns in a respectful attitude implying that he, a foreigner, in spite of
all differences of faith, understood the full importance of the rite now being
performed and even approved of it. He now approached the sick man with the
noiseless step of one in full vigor of life, with his delicate white fingers raised
from the green quilt the hand that was free, and turning sideways felt the pulse
and reflected a moment. The sick man was given something to drink, there
was a stir around him, then the people resumed their places and the service
continued. During this interval Pierre noticed that Prince Vasili left the chair
on which he had been leaning, and—with an air which intimated that he knew
what he was about and if others did not understand him it was so much the
worse for them—did not go up to the dying man, but passed by him, joined the
eldest princess, and moved with her to the side of the room where stood the
high bedstead with its silken hangings. On leaving the bed both Prince Vasili
and the princess passed out by a back door, but returned to their places one
after the other before the service was concluded. Pierre paid no more attention
to this occurrence than to the rest of what went on, having made up his mind
once for all that what he saw happening around him that evening was in some
way essential.
The chanting of the service ceased, and the voice of the priest was heard
respectfully congratulating the dying man on having received the sacrament.
The dying man lay as lifeless and immovable as before. Around him everyone
began to stir: steps were audible and whispers, among which Anna
Mikhaylovna's was the most distinct.
Pierre heard her say:
"Certainly he must be moved onto the bed; here it will be impossible..."
The sick man was so surrounded by doctors, princesses, and servants that
Pierre could no longer see the reddish-yellow face with its gray mane—which,
though he saw other faces as well, he had not lost sight of for a single moment
during the whole service. He judged by the cautious movements of those who
crowded round the invalid chair that they had lifted the dying man and were
moving him.
"Catch hold of my arm or you'll drop him!" he heard one of the servants say in
a frightened whisper. "Catch hold from underneath. Here!" exclaimed different
voices; and the heavy breathing of the bearers and the shuffling of their feet
grew more hurried, as if the weight they were carrying were too much for
them.
As the bearers, among whom was Anna Mikhaylovna, passed the young man
he caught a momentary glimpse between their heads and backs of the dying
man's high, stout, uncovered chest and powerful shoulders, raised by those
who were holding him under the armpits, and of his gray, curly, leonine head.
This head, with its remarkably broad brow and cheekbones, its handsome,
sensual mouth, and its cold, majestic expression, was not disfigured by the
approach of death. It was the same as Pierre remembered it three months
before, when the count had sent him to Petersburg. But now this head was
swaying helplessly with the uneven movements of the bearers, and the cold
listless gaze fixed itself upon nothing.
After a few minutes' bustle beside the high bedstead, those who had carried
the sick man dispersed. Anna Mikhaylovna touched Pierre's hand and said,
"Come." Pierre went with her to the bed on which the sick man had been laid
in a stately pose in keeping with the ceremony just completed. He lay with his
head propped high on the pillows. His hands were symmetrically placed on the
green silk quilt, the palms downward. When Pierre came up the count was
gazing straight at him, but with a look the significance of which could not be
understood by mortal man. Either this look meant nothing but that as long as
one has eyes they must look somewhere, or it meant too much. Pierre
hesitated, not knowing what to do, and glanced inquiringly at his guide. Anna
Mikhaylovna made a hurried sign with her eyes, glancing at the sick man's
hand and moving her lips as if to send it a kiss. Pierre, carefully stretching his
neck so as not to touch the quilt, followed her suggestion and pressed his lips
to the large boned, fleshy hand. Neither the hand nor a single muscle of the
count's face stirred. Once more Pierre looked questioningly at Anna
Mikhaylovna to see what he was to do next. Anna Mikhaylovna with her eyes
indicated a chair that stood beside the bed. Pierre obediently sat down, his
eyes asking if he were doing right. Anna Mikhaylovna nodded approvingly.
Again Pierre fell into the naively symmetrical pose of an Egyptian statue,
evidently distressed that his stout and clumsy body took up so much room and
doing his utmost to look as small as possible. He looked at the count, who still
gazed at the spot where Pierre's face had been before he sat down. Anna
Mikhaylovna indicated by her attitude her consciousness of the pathetic
importance of these last moments of meeting between the father and son. This
lasted about two minutes, which to Pierre seemed an hour. Suddenly the broad
muscles and lines of the count's face began to twitch. The twitching increased,
the handsome mouth was drawn to one side (only now did Pierre realize how
near death his father was), and from that distorted mouth issued an indistinct,
hoarse sound. Anna Mikhaylovna looked attentively at the sick man's eyes,
trying to guess what he wanted; she pointed first to Pierre, then to some drink,
then named Prince Vasili in an inquiring whisper, then pointed to the quilt. The
eyes and face of the sick man showed impatience. He made an effort to look at
the servant who stood constantly at the head of the bed.
"Wants to turn on the other side," whispered the servant, and got up to turn the
count's heavy body toward the wall.
Pierre rose to help him.
While the count was being turned over, one of his arms fell back helplessly
and he made a fruitless effort to pull it forward. Whether he noticed the look
of terror with which Pierre regarded that lifeless arm, or whether some other
thought flitted across his dying brain, at any rate he glanced at the refractory
arm, at Pierre's terror-stricken face, and again at the arm, and on his face a
feeble, piteous smile appeared, quite out of keeping with his features, that
seemed to deride his own helplessness. At sight of this smile Pierre felt an
unexpected quivering in his breast and a tickling in his nose, and tears dimmed
his eyes. The sick man was turned on to his side with his face to the wall. He
sighed.
"He is dozing," said Anna Mikhaylovna, observing that one of the princesses
was coming to take her turn at watching. "Let us go."
Pierre went out.
CHAPTER XXIV
There was now no one in the reception room except Prince Vasili and the
eldest princess, who were sitting under the portrait of Catherine the Great and
talking eagerly. As soon as they saw Pierre and his companion they became
silent, and Pierre thought he saw the princess hide something as she
whispered:
"I can't bear the sight of that woman."
"Catiche has had tea served in the small drawing room," said Prince Vasili to
Anna Mikhaylovna. "Go and take something, my poor Anna Mikhaylovna, or
you will not hold out."
To Pierre he said nothing, merely giving his arm a sympathetic squeeze below
the shoulder. Pierre went with Anna Mikhaylovna into the small drawing
room.
"There is nothing so refreshing after a sleepless night as a cup of this delicious
Russian tea," Lorrain was saying with an air of restrained animation as he
stood sipping tea from a delicate Chinese handleless cup before a table on
which tea and a cold supper were laid in the small circular room. Around the
table all who were at Count Bezukhov's house that night had gathered to
fortify themselves. Pierre well remembered this small circular drawing room
with its mirrors and little tables. During balls given at the house Pierre, who
did not know how to dance, had liked sitting in this room to watch the ladies
who, as they passed through in their ball dresses with diamonds and pearls on
their bare shoulders, looked at themselves in the brilliantly lighted mirrors
which repeated their reflections several times. Now this same room was dimly
lighted by two candles. On one small table tea things and supper dishes stood
in disorder, and in the middle of the night a motley throng of people sat there,
not merrymaking, but somberly whispering, and betraying by every word and
movement that they none of them forgot what was happening and what was
about to happen in the bedroom. Pierre did not eat anything though he would
very much have liked to. He looked inquiringly at his monitress and saw that
she was again going on tiptoe to the reception room where they had left Prince
Vasili and the eldest princess. Pierre concluded that this also was essential, and
after a short interval followed her. Anna Mikhaylovna was standing beside the
princess, and they were both speaking in excited whispers.
"Permit me, Princess, to know what is necessary and what is not necessary,"
said the younger of the two speakers, evidently in the same state of excitement
as when she had slammed the door of her room.
"But, my dear princess," answered Anna Mikhaylovna blandly but
impressively, blocking the way to the bedroom and preventing the other from
passing, "won't this be too much for poor Uncle at a moment when he needs
repose? Worldly conversation at a moment when his soul is already
prepared..."
Prince Vasili was seated in an easy chair in his familiar attitude, with one leg
crossed high above the other. His cheeks, which were so flabby that they
looked heavier below, were twitching violently; but he wore the air of a man
little concerned in what the two ladies were saying.
"Come, my dear Anna Mikhaylovna, let Catiche do as she pleases. You know
how fond the count is of her."
"I don't even know what is in this paper," said the younger of the two ladies,
addressing Prince Vasili and pointing to an inlaid portfolio she held in her
hand. "All I know is that his real will is in his writing table, and this is a paper
he has forgotten...."
She tried to pass Anna Mikhaylovna, but the latter sprang so as to bar her path.
"I know, my dear, kind princess," said Anna Mikhaylovna, seizing the
portfolio so firmly that it was plain she would not let go easily. "Dear princess,
I beg and implore you, have some pity on him! Je vous en conjure..."
The princess did not reply. Their efforts in the struggle for the portfolio were
the only sounds audible, but it was evident that if the princess did speak, her
words would not be flattering to Anna Mikhaylovna. Though the latter held on
tenaciously, her voice lost none of its honeyed firmness and softness.
"Pierre, my dear, come here. I think he will not be out of place in a family
consultation; is it not so, Prince?"
"Why don't you speak, cousin?" suddenly shrieked the princess so loud that
those in the drawing room heard her and were startled. "Why do you remain
silent when heaven knows who permits herself to interfere, making a scene on
the very threshold of a dying man's room? Intriguer!" she hissed viciously, and
tugged with all her might at the portfolio.
But Anna Mikhaylovna went forward a step or two to keep her hold on the
portfolio, and changed her grip.
Prince Vasili rose. "Oh!" said he with reproach and surprise, "this is absurd!
Come, let go I tell you."
The princess let go.
"And you too!"
But Anna Mikhaylovna did not obey him.
"Let go, I tell you! I will take the responsibility. I myself will go and ask him,
I!... does that satisfy you?"
"But, Prince," said Anna Mikhaylovna, "after such a solemn sacrament, allow
him a moment's peace! Here, Pierre, tell them your opinion," said she, turning
to the young man who, having come quite close, was gazing with
astonishment at the angry face of the princess which had lost all dignity, and at
the twitching cheeks of Prince Vasili.
"Remember that you will answer for the consequences," said Prince Vasili
severely. "You don't know what you are doing."
"Vile woman!" shouted the princess, darting unexpectedly at Anna
Mikhaylovna and snatching the portfolio from her.
Prince Vasili bent his head and spread out his hands.
At this moment that terrible door, which Pierre had watched so long and which
had always opened so quietly, burst noisily open and banged against the wall,
and the second of the three sisters rushed out wringing her hands.
"What are you doing!" she cried vehemently. "He is dying and you leave me
alone with him!"
Her sister dropped the portfolio. Anna Mikhaylovna, stooping, quickly caught
up the object of contention and ran into the bedroom. The eldest princess and
Prince Vasili, recovering themselves, followed her. A few minutes later the
eldest sister came out with a pale hard face, again biting her underlip. At sight
of Pierre her expression showed an irrepressible hatred.
"Yes, now you may be glad!" said she; "this is what you have been waiting
for." And bursting into tears she hid her face in her handkerchief and rushed
from the room.
Prince Vasili came next. He staggered to the sofa on which Pierre was sitting
and dropped onto it, covering his face with his hand. Pierre noticed that he was
pale and that his jaw quivered and shook as if in an ague.
"Ah, my friend!" said he, taking Pierre by the elbow; and there was in his
voice a sincerity and weakness Pierre had never observed in it before. "How
often we sin, how much we deceive, and all for what? I am near sixty, dear
friend... I too... All will end in death, all! Death is awful..." and he burst into
tears.
Anna Mikhaylovna came out last. She approached Pierre with slow, quiet
steps.
"Pierre!" she said.
Pierre gave her an inquiring look. She kissed the young man on his forehead,
wetting him with her tears. Then after a pause she said:
"He is no more...."
Pierre looked at her over his spectacles.
"Come, I will go with you. Try to weep, nothing gives such relief as tears."
She led him into the dark drawing room and Pierre was glad no one could see
his face. Anna Mikhaylovna left him, and when she returned he was fast
asleep with his head on his arm.
In the morning Anna Mikhaylovna said to Pierre:
"Yes, my dear, this is a great loss for us all, not to speak of you. But God will
support you: you are young, and are now, I hope, in command of an immense
fortune. The will has not yet been opened. I know you well enough to be sure
that this will not turn your head, but it imposes duties on you, and you must be
a man."
Pierre was silent.
"Perhaps later on I may tell you, my dear boy, that if I had not been there, God
only knows what would have happened! You know, Uncle promised me only
the day before yesterday not to forget Boris. But he had no time. I hope, my
dear friend, you will carry out your father's wish?"
Pierre understood nothing of all this and coloring shyly looked in silence at
Princess Anna Mikhaylovna. After her talk with Pierre, Anna Mikhaylovna
returned to the Rostovs' and went to bed. On waking in the morning she told
the Rostovs and all her acquaintances the details of Count Bezukhov's death.
She said the count had died as she would herself wish to die, that his end was
not only touching but edifying. As to the last meeting between father and son,
it was so touching that she could not think of it without tears, and did not
know which had behaved better during those awful moments—the father who
so remembered everything and everybody at last and had spoken such pathetic
words to the son, or Pierre, whom it had been pitiful to see, so stricken was he
with grief, though he tried hard to hide it in order not to sadden his dying
father. "It is painful, but it does one good. It uplifts the soul to see such men as
the old count and his worthy son," said she. Of the behavior of the eldest
princess and Prince Vasili she spoke disapprovingly, but in whispers and as a
great secret.
CHAPTER XXV
At Bald Hills, Prince Nicholas Andreevich Bolkonski's estate, the arrival of
young Prince Andrew and his wife was daily expected, but this expectation
did not upset the regular routine of life in the old prince's household. General
in Chief Prince Nicholas Andreevich (nicknamed in society, "the King of
Prussia") ever since the Emperor Paul had exiled him to his country estate had
lived there continuously with his daughter, Princess Mary, and her companion,
Mademoiselle Bourienne. Though in the new reign he was free to return to the
capitals, he still continued to live in the country, remarking that anyone who
wanted to see him could come the hundred miles from Moscow to Bald Hills,
while he himself needed no one and nothing. He used to say that there are only
two sources of human vice—idleness and superstition, and only two virtues—
activity and intelligence. He himself undertook his daughter's education, and
to develop these two cardinal virtues in her gave her lessons in algebra and
geometry till she was twenty, and arranged her life so that her whole time was
occupied. He was himself always occupied: writing his memoirs, solving
problems in higher mathematics, turning snuffboxes on a lathe, working in the
garden, or superintending the building that was always going on at his estate.
As regularity is a prime condition facilitating activity, regularity in his
household was carried to the highest point of exactitude. He always came to
table under precisely the same conditions, and not only at the same hour but at
the same minute. With those about him, from his daughter to his serfs, the
prince was sharp and invariably exacting, so that without being a hardhearted
man he inspired such fear and respect as few hardhearted men would have
aroused. Although he was in retirement and had now no influence in political
affairs, every high official appointed to the province in which the prince's
estate lay considered it his duty to visit him and waited in the lofty
antechamber just as the architect, gardener, or Princess Mary did, till the
prince appeared punctually to the appointed hour. Everyone sitting in this
antechamber experienced the same feeling of respect and even fear when the
enormously high study door opened and showed the figure of a rather small
old man, with powdered wig, small withered hands, and bushy gray eyebrows
which, when he frowned, sometimes hid the gleam of his shrewd, youthfully
glittering eyes.
On the morning of the day that the young couple were to arrive, Princess Mary
entered the antechamber as usual at the time appointed for the morning
greeting, crossing herself with trepidation and repeating a silent prayer. Every
morning she came in like that, and every morning prayed that the daily
interview might pass off well.
An old powdered manservant who was sitting in the antechamber rose quietly
and said in a whisper: "Please walk in."
Through the door came the regular hum of a lathe. The princess timidly
opened the door which moved noiselessly and easily. She paused at the
entrance. The prince was working at the lathe and after glancing round
continued his work.
The enormous study was full of things evidently in constant use. The large
table covered with books and plans, the tall glass-fronted bookcases with keys
in the locks, the high desk for writing while standing up, on which lay an open
exercise book, and the lathe with tools laid ready to hand and shavings
scattered around—all indicated continuous, varied, and orderly activity. The
motion of the small foot shod in a Tartar boot embroidered with silver, and the
firm pressure of the lean sinewy hand, showed that the prince still possessed
the tenacious endurance and vigor of hardy old age. After a few more turns of
the lathe he removed his foot from the pedal, wiped his chisel, dropped it into
a leather pouch attached to the lathe, and, approaching the table, summoned
his daughter. He never gave his children a blessing, so he simply held out his
bristly cheek (as yet unshaven) and, regarding her tenderly and attentively,
said severely:
"Quite well? All right then, sit down." He took the exercise book containing
lessons in geometry written by himself and drew up a chair with his foot.
"For tomorrow!" said he, quickly finding the page and making a scratch from
one paragraph to another with his hard nail.
The princess bent over the exercise book on the table.
"Wait a bit, here's a letter for you," said the old man suddenly, taking a letter
addressed in a woman's hand from a bag hanging above the table, onto which
he threw it.
At the sight of the letter red patches showed themselves on the princess' face.
She took it quickly and bent her head over it.
"From Heloise?" asked the prince with a cold smile that showed his still
sound, yellowish teeth.
"Yes, it's from Julie," replied the princess with a timid glance and a timid
smile.
"I'll let two more letters pass, but the third I'll read," said the prince sternly;
"I'm afraid you write much nonsense. I'll read the third!"
"Read this if you like, Father," said the princess, blushing still more and
holding out the letter.
"The third, I said the third!" cried the prince abruptly, pushing the letter away,
and leaning his elbows on the table he drew toward him the exercise book
containing geometrical figures.
"Well, madam," he began, stooping over the book close to his daughter and
placing an arm on the back of the chair on which she sat, so that she felt
herself surrounded on all sides by the acrid scent of old age and tobacco,
which she had known so long. "Now, madam, these triangles are equal; please
note that the angle ABC..."
The princess looked in a scared way at her father's eyes glittering close to her;
the red patches on her face came and went, and it was plain that she
understood nothing and was so frightened that her fear would prevent her
understanding any of her father's further explanations, however clear they
might be. Whether it was the teacher's fault or the pupil's, this same thing
happened every day: the princess' eyes grew dim, she could not see and could
not hear anything, but was only conscious of her stern father's withered face
close to her, of his breath and the smell of him, and could think only of how to
get away quickly to her own room to make out the problem in peace. The old
man was beside himself: moved the chair on which he was sitting noisily
backward and forward, made efforts to control himself and not become
vehement, but almost always did become vehement, scolded, and sometimes
flung the exercise book away.
The princess gave a wrong answer.
"Well now, isn't she a fool!" shouted the prince, pushing the book aside and
turning sharply away; but rising immediately, he paced up and down, lightly
touched his daughter's hair and sat down again.
He drew up his chair, and continued to explain.
"This won't do, Princess; it won't do," said he, when Princess Mary, having
taken and closed the exercise book with the next day's lesson, was about to
leave: "Mathematics are most important, madam! I don't want to have you like
our silly ladies. Get used to it and you'll like it," and he patted her cheek. "It
will drive all the nonsense out of your head."
She turned to go, but he stopped her with a gesture and took an uncut book
from the high desk.
"Here is some sort of Key to the Mysteries that your Heloise has sent you.
Religious! I don't interfere with anyone's belief... I have looked at it. Take it.
Well, now go. Go."
He patted her on the shoulder and himself closed the door after her.
Princess Mary went back to her room with the sad, scared expression that
rarely left her and which made her plain, sickly face yet plainer. She sat down
at her writing table, on which stood miniature portraits and which was littered
with books and papers. The princess was as untidy as her father was tidy. She
put down the geometry book and eagerly broke the seal of her letter. It was
from her most intimate friend from childhood; that same Julie Karagina who
had been at the Rostovs' name-day party.
Julie wrote in French:
Dear and precious Friend, How terrible and frightful a thing is separation!
Though I tell myself that half my life and half my happiness are wrapped up in
you, and that in spite of the distance separating us our hearts are united by
indissoluble bonds, my heart rebels against fate and in spite of the pleasures
and distractions around me I cannot overcome a certain secret sorrow that has
been in my heart ever since we parted. Why are we not together as we were
last summer, in your big study, on the blue sofa, the confidential sofa? Why
cannot I now, as three months ago, draw fresh moral strength from your look,
so gentle, calm, and penetrating, a look I loved so well and seem to see before
me as I write?
Having read thus far, Princess Mary sighed and glanced into the mirror which
stood on her right. It reflected a weak, ungraceful figure and thin face. Her
eyes, always sad, now looked with particular hopelessness at her reflection in
the glass. "She flatters me," thought the princess, turning away and continuing
to read. But Julie did not flatter her friend, the princess' eyes—large, deep and
luminous (it seemed as if at times there radiated from them shafts of warm
light)—were so beautiful that very often in spite of the plainness of her face
they gave her an attraction more powerful than that of beauty. But the princess
never saw the beautiful expression of her own eyes—the look they had when
she was not thinking of herself. As with everyone, her face assumed a forced
unnatural expression as soon as she looked in a glass. She went on reading:
All Moscow talks of nothing but war. One of my two brothers is already
abroad, the other is with the Guards, who are starting on their march to the
frontier. Our dear Emperor has left Petersburg and it is thought intends to
expose his precious person to the chances of war. God grant that the Corsican
monster who is destroying the peace of Europe may be overthrown by the
angel whom it has pleased the Almighty, in His goodness, to give us as
sovereign! To say nothing of my brothers, this war has deprived me of one of
the associations nearest my heart. I mean young Nicholas Rostov, who with
his enthusiasm could not bear to remain inactive and has left the university to
join the army. I will confess to you, dear Mary, that in spite of his extreme
youth his departure for the army was a great grief to me. This young man, of
whom I spoke to you last summer, is so noble-minded and full of that real
youthfulness which one seldom finds nowadays among our old men of twenty
and, particularly, he is so frank and has so much heart. He is so pure and
poetic that my relations with him, transient as they were, have been one of the
sweetest comforts to my poor heart, which has already suffered so much.
Someday I will tell you about our parting and all that was said then. That is
still too fresh. Ah, dear friend, you are happy not to know these poignant joys
and sorrows. You are fortunate, for the latter are generally the stronger! I know
very well that Count Nicholas is too young ever to be more to me than a
friend, but this sweet friendship, this poetic and pure intimacy, were what my
heart needed. But enough of this! The chief news, about which all Moscow
gossips, is the death of old Count Bezukhov, and his inheritance. Fancy! The
three princesses have received very little, Prince Vasili nothing, and it is
Monsieur Pierre who has inherited all the property and has besides been
recognized as legitimate; so that he is now Count Bezukhov and possessor of
the finest fortune in Russia. It is rumored that Prince Vasili played a very
despicable part in this affair and that he returned to Petersburg quite
crestfallen.
I confess I understand very little about all these matters of wills and
inheritance; but I do know that since this young man, whom we all used to
know as plain Monsieur Pierre, has become Count Bezukhov and the owner of
one of the largest fortunes in Russia, I am much amused to watch the change
in the tone and manners of the mammas burdened by marriageable daughters,
and of the young ladies themselves, toward him, though, between you and me,
he always seemed to me a poor sort of fellow. As for the past two years people
have amused themselves by finding husbands for me (most of whom I don't
even know), the matchmaking chronicles of Moscow now speak of me as the
future Countess Bezukhova. But you will understand that I have no desire for
the post. A propos of marriages: do you know that a while ago that universal
auntie Anna Mikhaylovna told me, under the seal of strict secrecy, of a plan of
marriage for you. It is neither more nor less than with Prince Vasili's son
Anatole, whom they wish to reform by marrying him to someone rich and
distinguee, and it is on you that his relations' choice has fallen. I don't know
what you will think of it, but I consider it my duty to let you know of it. He is
said to be very handsome and a terrible scapegrace. That is all I have been able
to find out about him.
But enough of gossip. I am at the end of my second sheet of paper, and
Mamma has sent for me to go and dine at the Apraksins'. Read the mystical
book I am sending you; it has an enormous success here. Though there are
things in it difficult for the feeble human mind to grasp, it is an admirable
book which calms and elevates the soul. Adieu! Give my respects to monsieur
your father and my compliments to Mademoiselle Bourienne. I embrace you
as I love you.
JULIE
P.S. Let me have news of your brother and his charming little wife.
The princess pondered awhile with a thoughtful smile and her luminous eyes
lit up so that her face was entirely transformed. Then she suddenly rose and
with her heavy tread went up to the table. She took a sheet of paper and her
hand moved rapidly over it. This is the reply she wrote, also in French:
Dear and precious Friend, Your letter of the 13th has given me great delight.
So you still love me, my romantic Julie? Separation, of which you say so
much that is bad, does not seem to have had its usual effect on you. You
complain of our separation. What then should I say, if I dared complain, I who
am deprived of all who are dear to me? Ah, if we had not religion to console
us life would be very sad. Why do you suppose that I should look severely on
your affection for that young man? On such matters I am only severe with
myself. I understand such feelings in others, and if never having felt them I
cannot approve of them, neither do I condemn them. Only it seems to me that
Christian love, love of one's neighbor, love of one's enemy, is worthier,
sweeter, and better than the feelings which the beautiful eyes of a young man
can inspire in a romantic and loving young girl like yourself.
The news of Count Bezukhov's death reached us before your letter and my
father was much affected by it. He says the count was the last representative
but one of the great century, and that it is his own turn now, but that he will do
all he can to let his turn come as late as possible. God preserve us from that
terrible misfortune!
I cannot agree with you about Pierre, whom I knew as a child. He always
seemed to me to have an excellent heart, and that is the quality I value most in
people. As to his inheritance and the part played by Prince Vasili, it is very sad
for both. Ah, my dear friend, our divine Saviour's words, that it is easier for a
camel to go through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter the
Kingdom of God, are terribly true. I pity Prince Vasili but am still more sorry
for Pierre. So young, and burdened with such riches—to what temptations he
will be exposed! If I were asked what I desire most on earth, it would be to be
poorer than the poorest beggar. A thousand thanks, dear friend, for the volume
you have sent me and which has such success in Moscow. Yet since you tell
me that among some good things it contains others which our weak human
understanding cannot grasp, it seems to me rather useless to spend time in
reading what is unintelligible and can therefore bear no fruit. I never could
understand the fondness some people have for confusing their minds by
dwelling on mystical books that merely awaken their doubts and excite their
imagination, giving them a bent for exaggeration quite contrary to Christian
simplicity. Let us rather read the Epistles and Gospels. Let us not seek to
penetrate what mysteries they contain; for how can we, miserable sinners that
we are, know the terrible and holy secrets of Providence while we remain in
this flesh which forms an impenetrable veil between us and the Eternal? Let us
rather confine ourselves to studying those sublime rules which our divine
Saviour has left for our guidance here below. Let us try to conform to them
and follow them, and let us be persuaded that the less we let our feeble human
minds roam, the better we shall please God, who rejects all knowledge that
does not come from Him; and the less we seek to fathom what He has been
pleased to conceal from us, the sooner will He vouchsafe its revelation to us
through His divine Spirit.
My father has not spoken to me of a suitor, but has only told me that he has
received a letter and is expecting a visit from Prince Vasili. In regard to this
project of marriage for me, I will tell you, dear sweet friend, that I look on
marriage as a divine institution to which we must conform. However painful it
may be to me, should the Almighty lay the duties of wife and mother upon me
I shall try to perform them as faithfully as I can, without disquieting myself by
examining my feelings toward him whom He may give me for husband.
I have had a letter from my brother, who announces his speedy arrival at Bald
Hills with his wife. This pleasure will be but a brief one, however, for he will
leave us again to take part in this unhappy war into which we have been
drawn, God knows how or why. Not only where you are—at the heart of
affairs and of the world—is the talk all of war, even here amid fieldwork and
the calm of nature—which townsfolk consider characteristic of the country—
rumors of war are heard and painfully felt. My father talks of nothing but
marches and countermarches, things of which I understand nothing; and the
day before yesterday during my daily walk through the village I witnessed a
heartrending scene.... It was a convoy of conscripts enrolled from our people
and starting to join the army. You should have seen the state of the mothers,
wives, and children of the men who were going and should have heard the
sobs. It seems as though mankind has forgotten the laws of its divine Saviour,
Who preached love and forgiveness of injuries—and that men attribute the
greatest merit to skill in killing one another.
Adieu, dear and kind friend; may our divine Saviour and His most Holy
Mother keep you in their holy and all-powerful care!
MARY
"Ah, you are sending off a letter, Princess? I have already dispatched mine. I
have written to my poor mother," said the smiling Mademoiselle Bourienne
rapidly, in her pleasant mellow tones and with guttural r's. She brought into
Princess Mary's strenuous, mournful, and gloomy world a quite different
atmosphere, careless, lighthearted, and self-satisfied.
"Princess, I must warn you," she added, lowering her voice and evidently
listening to herself with pleasure, and speaking with exaggerated
grasseyement, "the prince has been scolding Michael Ivanovich. He is in a
very bad humor, very morose. Be prepared."
"Ah, dear friend," replied Princess Mary, "I have asked you never to warn me
of the humor my father is in. I do not allow myself to judge him and would not
have others do so."
The princess glanced at her watch and, seeing that she was five minutes late in
starting her practice on the clavichord, went into the sitting room with a look
of alarm. Between twelve and two o'clock, as the day was mapped out, the
prince rested and the princess played the clavichord.
CHAPTER XXVI
The gray-haired valet was sitting drowsily listening to the snoring of the
prince, who was in his large study. From the far side of the house through the
closed doors came the sound of difficult passages—twenty times repeated—of
a sonata by Dussek.
Just then a closed carriage and another with a hood drove up to the porch.
Prince Andrew got out of the carriage, helped his little wife to alight, and let
her pass into the house before him. Old Tikhon, wearing a wig, put his head
out of the door of the antechamber, reported in a whisper that the prince was
sleeping, and hastily closed the door. Tikhon knew that neither the son's arrival
nor any other unusual event must be allowed to disturb the appointed order of
the day. Prince Andrew apparently knew this as well as Tikhon; he looked at
his watch as if to ascertain whether his father's habits had changed since he
was at home last, and, having assured himself that they had not, he turned to
his wife.
"He will get up in twenty minutes. Let us go across to Mary's room," he said.
The little princess had grown stouter during this time, but her eyes and her
short, downy, smiling lip lifted when she began to speak just as merrily and
prettily as ever.
"Why, this is a palace!" she said to her husband, looking around with the
expression with which people compliment their host at a ball. "Let's come,
quick, quick!" And with a glance round, she smiled at Tikhon, at her husband,
and at the footman who accompanied them.
"Is that Mary practicing? Let's go quietly and take her by surprise."
Prince Andrew followed her with a courteous but sad expression.
"You've grown older, Tikhon," he said in passing to the old man, who kissed
his hand.
Before they reached the room from which the sounds of the clavichord came,
the pretty, fair haired Frenchwoman, Mademoiselle Bourienne, rushed out
apparently beside herself with delight.
"Ah! what joy for the princess!" exclaimed she: "At last! I must let her know."
"No, no, please not... You are Mademoiselle Bourienne," said the little
princess, kissing her. "I know you already through my sister-in-law's
friendship for you. She was not expecting us?"
They went up to the door of the sitting room from which came the sound of
the oft-repeated passage of the sonata. Prince Andrew stopped and made a
grimace, as if expecting something unpleasant.
The little princess entered the room. The passage broke off in the middle, a cry
was heard, then Princess Mary's heavy tread and the sound of kissing. When
Prince Andrew went in the two princesses, who had only met once before for a
short time at his wedding, were in each other's arms warmly pressing their lips
to whatever place they happened to touch. Mademoiselle Bourienne stood near
them pressing her hand to her heart, with a beatific smile and obviously
equally ready to cry or to laugh. Prince Andrew shrugged his shoulders and
frowned, as lovers of music do when they hear a false note. The two women
let go of one another, and then, as if afraid of being too late, seized each
other's hands, kissing them and pulling them away, and again began kissing
each other on the face, and then to Prince Andrew's surprise both began to cry
and kissed again. Mademoiselle Bourienne also began to cry. Prince Andrew
evidently felt ill at ease, but to the two women it seemed quite natural that they
should cry, and apparently it never entered their heads that it could have been
otherwise at this meeting.
"Ah! my dear!... Ah! Mary!" they suddenly exclaimed, and then laughed. "I
dreamed last night..."—"You were not expecting us?..." "Ah! Mary, you have
got thinner?..." "And you have grown stouter!..."
"I knew the princess at once," put in Mademoiselle Bourienne.
"And I had no idea!..." exclaimed Princess Mary. "Ah, Andrew, I did not see
you."
Prince Andrew and his sister, hand in hand, kissed one another, and he told her
she was still the same crybaby as ever. Princess Mary had turned toward her
brother, and through her tears the loving, warm, gentle look of her large
luminous eyes, very beautiful at that moment, rested on Prince Andrew's face.
The little princess talked incessantly, her short, downy upper lip continually
and rapidly touching her rosy nether lip when necessary and drawing up again
next moment when her face broke into a smile of glittering teeth and sparkling
eyes. She told of an accident they had had on the Spasski Hill which might
have been serious for her in her condition, and immediately after that informed
them that she had left all her clothes in Petersburg and that heaven knew what
she would have to dress in here; and that Andrew had quite changed, and that
Kitty Odyntsova had married an old man, and that there was a suitor for Mary,
a real one, but that they would talk of that later. Princess Mary was still
looking silently at her brother and her beautiful eyes were full of love and
sadness. It was plain that she was following a train of thought independent of
her sister-in-law's words. In the midst of a description of the last Petersburg
fete she addressed her brother:
"So you are really going to the war, Andrew?" she said sighing.
Lise sighed too.
"Yes, and even tomorrow," replied her brother.
"He is leaving me here, God knows why, when he might have had
promotion..."
Princess Mary did not listen to the end, but continuing her train of thought
turned to her sister-in-law with a tender glance at her figure.
"Is it certain?" she said.
The face of the little princess changed. She sighed and said: "Yes, quite
certain. Ah! it is very dreadful..."
Her lip descended. She brought her face close to her sister-in-law's and
unexpectedly again began to cry.
"She needs rest," said Prince Andrew with a frown. "Don't you, Lise? Take her
to your room and I'll go to Father. How is he? Just the same?"
"Yes, just the same. Though I don't know what your opinion will be,"
answered the princess joyfully.
"And are the hours the same? And the walks in the avenues? And the lathe?"
asked Prince Andrew with a scarcely perceptible smile which showed that, in
spite of all his love and respect for his father, he was aware of his weaknesses.
"The hours are the same, and the lathe, and also the mathematics and my
geometry lessons," said Princess Mary gleefully, as if her lessons in geometry
were among the greatest delights of her life.
When the twenty minutes had elapsed and the time had come for the old
prince to get up, Tikhon came to call the young prince to his father. The old
man made a departure from his usual routine in honor of his son's arrival: he
gave orders to admit him to his apartments while he dressed for dinner. The
old prince always dressed in old-fashioned style, wearing an antique coat and
powdered hair; and when Prince Andrew entered his father's dressing room
(not with the contemptuous look and manner he wore in drawing rooms, but
with the animated face with which he talked to Pierre), the old man was sitting
on a large leather-covered chair, wrapped in a powdering mantle, entrusting
his head to Tikhon.
"Ah! here's the warrior! Wants to vanquish Buonaparte?" said the old man,
shaking his powdered head as much as the tail, which Tikhon was holding fast
to plait, would allow.
"You at least must tackle him properly, or else if he goes on like this he'll soon
have us, too, for his subjects! How are you?" And he held out his cheek.
The old man was in a good temper after his nap before dinner. (He used to say
that a nap "after dinner was silver—before dinner, golden.") He cast happy,
sidelong glances at his son from under his thick, bushy eyebrows. Prince
Andrew went up and kissed his father on the spot indicated to him. He made
no reply on his father's favorite topic—making fun of the military men of the
day, and more particularly of Bonaparte.
"Yes, Father, I have come to you and brought my wife who is pregnant," said
Prince Andrew, following every movement of his father's face with an eager
and respectful look. "How is your health?"
"Only fools and rakes fall ill, my boy. You know me: I am busy from morning
till night and abstemious, so of course I am well."
"Thank God," said his son smiling.
"God has nothing to do with it! Well, go on," he continued, returning to his
hobby; "tell me how the Germans have taught you to fight Bonaparte by this
new science you call 'strategy.'"
Prince Andrew smiled.
"Give me time to collect my wits, Father," said he, with a smile that showed
that his father's foibles did not prevent his son from loving and honoring him.
"Why, I have not yet had time to settle down!"
"Nonsense, nonsense!" cried the old man, shaking his pigtail to see whether it
was firmly plaited, and grasping his by the hand. "The house for your wife is
ready. Princess Mary will take her there and show her over, and they'll talk
nineteen to the dozen. That's their woman's way! I am glad to have her. Sit
down and talk. About Mikhelson's army I understand—Tolstoy's too... a
simultaneous expedition.... But what's the southern army to do? Prussia is
neutral... I know that. What about Austria?" said he, rising from his chair and
pacing up and down the room followed by Tikhon, who ran after him, handing
him different articles of clothing. "What of Sweden? How will they cross
Pomerania?"
Prince Andrew, seeing that his father insisted, began—at first reluctantly, but
gradually with more and more animation, and from habit changing
unconsciously from Russian to French as he went on—to explain the plan of
operation for the coming campaign. He explained how an army, ninety
thousand strong, was to threaten Prussia so as to bring her out of her neutrality
and draw her into the war; how part of that army was to join some Swedish
forces at Stralsund; how two hundred and twenty thousand Austrians, with a
hundred thousand Russians, were to operate in Italy and on the Rhine; how
fifty thousand Russians and as many English were to land at Naples, and how
a total force of five hundred thousand men was to attack the French from
different sides. The old prince did not evince the least interest during this
explanation, but as if he were not listening to it continued to dress while
walking about, and three times unexpectedly interrupted. Once he stopped it
by shouting: "The white one, the white one!"
This meant that Tikhon was not handing him the waistcoat he wanted. Another
time he interrupted, saying:
"And will she soon be confined?" and shaking his head reproachfully said:
"That's bad! Go on, go on."
The third interruption came when Prince Andrew was finishing his
description. The old man began to sing, in the cracked voice of old age:
"Malbrook s'en va-t-en guerre. Dieu sait quand reviendra." *
* "Marlborough is going to the wars; God knows when he'll
return."
His son only smiled.
"I don't say it's a plan I approve of," said the son; "I am only telling you what
it is. Napoleon has also formed his plan by now, not worse than this one."
"Well, you've told me nothing new," and the old man repeated, meditatively
and rapidly:
"Dieu sait quand reviendra. Go to the dining room."
CHAPTER XXVII
At the appointed hour the prince, powdered and shaven, entered the dining
room where his daughter-in-law, Princess Mary, and Mademoiselle Bourienne
were already awaiting him together with his architect, who by a strange
caprice of his employer's was admitted to table though the position of that
insignificant individual was such as could certainly not have caused him to
expect that honor. The prince, who generally kept very strictly to social
distinctions and rarely admitted even important government officials to his
table, had unexpectedly selected Michael Ivanovich (who always went into a
corner to blow his nose on his checked handkerchief) to illustrate the theory
that all men are equals, and had more than once impressed on his daughter that
Michael Ivanovich was "not a whit worse than you or I." At dinner the prince
usually spoke to the taciturn Michael Ivanovich more often than to anyone
else.
In the dining room, which like all the rooms in the house was exceedingly
lofty, the members of the household and the footmen—one behind each chair
—stood waiting for the prince to enter. The head butler, napkin on arm, was
scanning the setting of the table, making signs to the footmen, and anxiously
glancing from the clock to the door by which the prince was to enter. Prince
Andrew was looking at a large gilt frame, new to him, containing the
genealogical tree of the Princes Bolkonski, opposite which hung another such
frame with a badly painted portrait (evidently by the hand of the artist
belonging to the estate) of a ruling prince, in a crown—an alleged descendant
of Rurik and ancestor of the Bolkonskis. Prince Andrew, looking again at that
genealogical tree, shook his head, laughing as a man laughs who looks at a
portrait so characteristic of the original as to be amusing.
"How thoroughly like him that is!" he said to Princess Mary, who had come up
to him.
Princess Mary looked at her brother in surprise. She did not understand what
he was laughing at. Everything her father did inspired her with reverence and
was beyond question.
"Everyone has his Achilles' heel," continued Prince Andrew. "Fancy, with his
powerful mind, indulging in such nonsense!"
Princess Mary could not understand the boldness of her brother's criticism and
was about to reply, when the expected footsteps were heard coming from the
study. The prince walked in quickly and jauntily as was his wont, as if
intentionally contrasting the briskness of his manners with the strict formality
of his house. At that moment the great clock struck two and another with a
shrill tone joined in from the drawing room. The prince stood still; his lively
glittering eyes from under their thick, bushy eyebrows sternly scanned all
present and rested on the little princess. She felt, as courtiers do when the Tsar
enters, the sensation of fear and respect which the old man inspired in all
around him. He stroked her hair and then patted her awkwardly on the back of
her neck.
"I'm glad, glad, to see you," he said, looking attentively into her eyes, and then
quickly went to his place and sat down. "Sit down, sit down! Sit down,
Michael Ianovich!"
He indicated a place beside him to his daughter-in-law. A footman moved the
chair for her.
"Ho, ho!" said the old man, casting his eyes on her rounded figure. "You've
been in a hurry. That's bad!"
He laughed in his usual dry, cold, unpleasant way, with his lips only and not
with his eyes.
"You must walk, walk as much as possible, as much as possible," he said.
The little princess did not, or did not wish to, hear his words. She was silent
and seemed confused. The prince asked her about her father, and she began to
smile and talk. He asked about mutual acquaintances, and she became still
more animated and chattered away giving him greetings from various people
and retelling the town gossip.
"Countess Apraksina, poor thing, has lost her husband and she has cried her
eyes out," she said, growing more and more lively.
As she became animated the prince looked at her more and more sternly, and
suddenly, as if he had studied her sufficiently and had formed a definite idea of
her, he turned away and addressed Michael Ivanovich.
"Well, Michael Ivanovich, our Bonaparte will be having a bad time of it.
Prince Andrew" (he always spoke thus of his son) "has been telling me what
forces are being collected against him! While you and I never thought much of
him."
Michael Ivanovich did not at all know when "you and I" had said such things
about Bonaparte, but understanding that he was wanted as a peg on which to
hang the prince's favorite topic, he looked inquiringly at the young prince,
wondering what would follow.
"He is a great tactician!" said the prince to his son, pointing to the architect.
And the conversation again turned on the war, on Bonaparte, and the generals
and statesmen of the day. The old prince seemed convinced not only that all
the men of the day were mere babies who did not know the A B C of war or of
politics, and that Bonaparte was an insignificant little Frenchy, successful only
because there were no longer any Potemkins or Suvorovs left to oppose him;
but he was also convinced that there were no political difficulties in Europe
and no real war, but only a sort of puppet show at which the men of the day
were playing, pretending to do something real. Prince Andrew gaily bore with
his father's ridicule of the new men, and drew him on and listened to him with
evident pleasure.
"The past always seems good," said he, "but did not Suvorov himself fall into
a trap Moreau set him, and from which he did not know how to escape?"
"Who told you that? Who?" cried the prince. "Suvorov!" And he jerked away
his plate, which Tikhon briskly caught. "Suvorov!... Consider, Prince Andrew.
Two... Frederick and Suvorov; Moreau!... Moreau would have been a prisoner
if Suvorov had had a free hand; but he had the Hofs-kriegs-wurst-schnappsRath on his hands. It would have puzzled the devil himself! When you get
there you'll find out what those Hofs-kriegs-wurst-Raths are! Suvorov couldn't
manage them so what chance has Michael Kutuzov? No, my dear boy," he
continued, "you and your generals won't get on against Buonaparte; you'll
have to call in the French, so that birds of a feather may fight together. The
German, Pahlen, has been sent to New York in America, to fetch the
Frenchman, Moreau," he said, alluding to the invitation made that year to
Moreau to enter the Russian service.... "Wonderful!... Were the Potemkins,
Suvorovs, and Orlovs Germans? No, lad, either you fellows have all lost your
wits, or I have outlived mine. May God help you, but we'll see what will
happen. Buonaparte has become a great commander among them! Hm!..."
"I don't at all say that all the plans are good," said Prince Andrew, "I am only
surprised at your opinion of Bonaparte. You may laugh as much as you like,
but all the same Bonaparte is a great general!"
"Michael Ivanovich!" cried the old prince to the architect who, busy with his
roast meat, hoped he had been forgotten: "Didn't I tell you Buonaparte was a
great tactician? Here, he says the same thing."
"To be sure, your excellency," replied the architect.
The prince again laughed his frigid laugh.
"Buonaparte was born with a silver spoon in his mouth. He has got splendid
soldiers. Besides he began by attacking Germans. And only idlers have failed
to beat the Germans. Since the world began everybody has beaten the
Germans. They beat no one—except one another. He made his reputation
fighting them."
And the prince began explaining all the blunders which, according to him,
Bonaparte had made in his campaigns and even in politics. His son made no
rejoinder, but it was evident that whatever arguments were presented he was as
little able as his father to change his opinion. He listened, refraining from a
reply, and involuntarily wondered how this old man, living alone in the
country for so many years, could know and discuss so minutely and acutely all
the recent European military and political events.
"You think I'm an old man and don't understand the present state of affairs?"
concluded his father. "But it troubles me. I don't sleep at night. Come now,
where has this great commander of yours shown his skill?" he concluded.
"That would take too long to tell," answered the son.
"Well, then go to your Buonaparte! Mademoiselle Bourienne, here's another
admirer of that powder-monkey emperor of yours," he exclaimed in excellent
French.
"You know, Prince, I am not a Bonapartist!"
"Dieu sait quand reviendra..." hummed the prince out of tune and, with a laugh
still more so, he quitted the table.
The little princess during the whole discussion and the rest of the dinner sat
silent, glancing with a frightened look now at her father-in-law and now at
Princess Mary. When they left the table she took her sister-in-law's arm and
drew her into another room.
"What a clever man your father is," said she; "perhaps that is why I am afraid
of him."
"Oh, he is so kind!" answered Princess Mary.
CHAPTER XXVIII
Prince Andrew was to leave next evening. The old prince, not altering his
routine, retired as usual after dinner. The little princess was in her sister-inlaw's room. Prince Andrew in a traveling coat without epaulettes had been
packing with his valet in the rooms assigned to him. After inspecting the
carriage himself and seeing the trunks put in, he ordered the horses to be
harnessed. Only those things he always kept with him remained in his room; a
small box, a large canteen fitted with silver plate, two Turkish pistols and a
saber—a present from his father who had brought it from the siege of
Ochakov. All these traveling effects of Prince Andrew's were in very good
order: new, clean, and in cloth covers carefully tied with tapes.
When starting on a journey or changing their mode of life, men capable of
reflection are generally in a serious frame of mind. At such moments one
reviews the past and plans for the future. Prince Andrew's face looked very
thoughtful and tender. With his hands behind him he paced briskly from corner
to corner of the room, looking straight before him and thoughtfully shaking his
head. Did he fear going to the war, or was he sad at leaving his wife?—
perhaps both, but evidently he did not wish to be seen in that mood, for
hearing footsteps in the passage he hurriedly unclasped his hands, stopped at a
table as if tying the cover of the small box, and assumed his usual tranquil and
impenetrable expression. It was the heavy tread of Princess Mary that he
heard.
"I hear you have given orders to harness," she cried, panting (she had
apparently been running), "and I did so wish to have another talk with you
alone! God knows how long we may again be parted. You are not angry with
me for coming? You have changed so, Andrusha," she added, as if to explain
such a question.
She smiled as she uttered his pet name, "Andrusha." It was obviously strange
to her to think that this stern handsome man should be Andrusha—the slender
mischievous boy who had been her playfellow in childhood.
"And where is Lise?" he asked, answering her question only by a smile.
"She was so tired that she has fallen asleep on the sofa in my room. Oh,
Andrew! What a treasure of a wife you have," said she, sitting down on the
sofa, facing her brother. "She is quite a child: such a dear, merry child. I have
grown so fond of her."
Prince Andrew was silent, but the princess noticed the ironical and
contemptuous look that showed itself on his face.
"One must be indulgent to little weaknesses; who is free from them, Andrew?
Don't forget that she has grown up and been educated in society, and so her
position now is not a rosy one. We should enter into everyone's situation. Tout
comprendre, c'est tout pardonner. * Think what it must be for her, poor thing,
after what she has been used to, to be parted from her husband and be left
alone in the country, in her condition! It's very hard."
* To understand all is to forgive all.
Prince Andrew smiled as he looked at his sister, as we smile at those we think
we thoroughly understand.
"You live in the country and don't think the life terrible," he replied.
"I... that's different. Why speak of me? I don't want any other life, and can't,
for I know no other. But think, Andrew: for a young society woman to be
buried in the country during the best years of her life, all alone—for Papa is
always busy, and I... well, you know what poor resources I have for
entertaining a woman used to the best society. There is only Mademoiselle
Bourienne...."
"I don't like your Mademoiselle Bourienne at all," said Prince Andrew.
"No? She is very nice and kind and, above all, she's much to be pitied. She has
no one, no one. To tell the truth, I don't need her, and she's even in my way.
You know I always was a savage, and now am even more so. I like being
alone.... Father likes her very much. She and Michael Ivanovich are the two
people to whom he is always gentle and kind, because he has been a
benefactor to them both. As Sterne says: 'We don't love people so much for the
good they have done us, as for the good we have done them.' Father took her
when she was homeless after losing her own father. She is very good-natured,
and my father likes her way of reading. She reads to him in the evenings and
reads splendidly."
"To be quite frank, Mary, I expect Father's character sometimes makes things
trying for you, doesn't it?" Prince Andrew asked suddenly.
Princess Mary was first surprised and then aghast at this question.
"For me? For me?... Trying for me!..." said she.
"He always was rather harsh; and now I should think he's getting very trying,"
said Prince Andrew, apparently speaking lightly of their father in order to
puzzle or test his sister.
"You are good in every way, Andrew, but you have a kind of intellectual
pride," said the princess, following the train of her own thoughts rather than
the trend of the conversation—"and that's a great sin. How can one judge
Father? But even if one might, what feeling except veneration could such a
man as my father evoke? And I am so contented and happy with him. I only
wish you were all as happy as I am."
Her brother shook his head incredulously.
"The only thing that is hard for me... I will tell you the truth, Andrew... is
Father's way of treating religious subjects. I don't understand how a man of his
immense intellect can fail to see what is as clear as day, and can go so far
astray. That is the only thing that makes me unhappy. But even in this I can see
lately a shade of improvement. His satire has been less bitter of late, and there
was a monk he received and had a long talk with."
"Ah! my dear, I am afraid you and your monk are wasting your powder," said
Prince Andrew banteringly yet tenderly.
"Ah! mon ami, I only pray, and hope that God will hear me. Andrew..." she
said timidly after a moment's silence, "I have a great favor to ask of you."
"What is it, dear?"
"No—promise that you will not refuse! It will give you no trouble and is
nothing unworthy of you, but it will comfort me. Promise, Andrusha!..." said
she, putting her hand in her reticule but not yet taking out what she was
holding inside it, as if what she held were the subject of her request and must
not be shown before the request was granted.
She looked timidly at her brother.
"Even if it were a great deal of trouble..." answered Prince Andrew, as if
guessing what it was about.
"Think what you please! I know you are just like Father. Think as you please,
but do this for my sake! Please do! Father's father, our grandfather, wore it in
all his wars." (She still did not take out what she was holding in her reticule.)
"So you promise?"
"Of course. What is it?"
"Andrew, I bless you with this icon and you must promise me you will never
take it off. Do you promise?"
"If it does not weigh a hundredweight and won't break my neck... To please
you..." said Prince Andrew. But immediately, noticing the pained expression
his joke had brought to his sister's face, he repented and added: "I am glad;
really, dear, I am very glad."
"Against your will He will save and have mercy on you and bring you to
Himself, for in Him alone is truth and peace," said she in a voice trembling
with emotion, solemnly holding up in both hands before her brother a small,
oval, antique, dark-faced icon of the Saviour in a gold setting, on a finely
wrought silver chain.
She crossed herself, kissed the icon, and handed it to Andrew.
"Please, Andrew, for my sake!..."
Rays of gentle light shone from her large, timid eyes. Those eyes lit up the
whole of her thin, sickly face and made it beautiful. Her brother would have
taken the icon, but she stopped him. Andrew understood, crossed himself and
kissed the icon. There was a look of tenderness, for he was touched, but also a
gleam of irony on his face.
"Thank you, my dear." She kissed him on the forehead and sat down again on
the sofa. They were silent for a while.
"As I was saying to you, Andrew, be kind and generous as you always used to
be. Don't judge Lise harshly," she began. "She is so sweet, so good-natured,
and her position now is a very hard one."
"I do not think I have complained of my wife to you, Masha, or blamed her.
Why do you say all this to me?"
Red patches appeared on Princess Mary's face and she was silent as if she felt
guilty.
"I have said nothing to you, but you have already been talked to. And I am
sorry for that," he went on.
The patches grew deeper on her forehead, neck, and cheeks. She tried to say
something but could not. Her brother had guessed right: the little princess had
been crying after dinner and had spoken of her forebodings about her
confinement, and how she dreaded it, and had complained of her fate, her
father-in-law, and her husband. After crying she had fallen asleep. Prince
Andrew felt sorry for his sister.
"Know this, Masha: I can't reproach, have not reproached, and never shall
reproach my wife with anything, and I cannot reproach myself with anything
in regard to her; and that always will be so in whatever circumstances I may
be placed. But if you want to know the truth... if you want to know whether I
am happy? No! Is she happy? No! But why this is so I don't know..."
As he said this he rose, went to his sister, and, stooping, kissed her forehead.
His fine eyes lit up with a thoughtful, kindly, and unaccustomed brightness,
but he was looking not at his sister but over her head toward the darkness of
the open doorway.
"Let us go to her, I must say good-by. Or—go and wake and I'll come in a
moment. Petrushka!" he called to his valet: "Come here, take these away. Put
this on the seat and this to the right."
Princess Mary rose and moved to the door, then stopped and said: "Andrew, if
you had faith you would have turned to God and asked Him to give you the
love you do not feel, and your prayer would have been answered."
"Well, may be!" said Prince Andrew. "Go, Masha; I'll come immediately."
On the way to his sister's room, in the passage which connected one wing with
the other, Prince Andrew met Mademoiselle Bourienne smiling sweetly. It was
the third time that day that, with an ecstatic and artless smile, she had met him
in secluded passages.
"Oh! I thought you were in your room," she said, for some reason blushing
and dropping her eyes.
Prince Andrew looked sternly at her and an expression of anger suddenly
came over his face. He said nothing to her but looked at her forehead and hair,
without looking at her eyes, with such contempt that the Frenchwoman
blushed and went away without a word. When he reached his sister's room his
wife was already awake and her merry voice, hurrying one word after another,
came through the open door. She was speaking as usual in French, and as if
after long self-restraint she wished to make up for lost time.
"No, but imagine the old Countess Zubova, with false curls and her mouth full
of false teeth, as if she were trying to cheat old age.... Ha, ha, ha! Mary!"
This very sentence about Countess Zubova and this same laugh Prince
Andrew had already heard from his wife in the presence of others some five
times. He entered the room softly. The little princess, plump and rosy, was
sitting in an easy chair with her work in her hands, talking incessantly,
repeating Petersburg reminiscences and even phrases. Prince Andrew came up,
stroked her hair, and asked if she felt rested after their journey. She answered
him and continued her chatter.
The coach with six horses was waiting at the porch. It was an autumn night, so
dark that the coachman could not see the carriage pole. Servants with lanterns
were bustling about in the porch. The immense house was brilliant with lights
shining through its lofty windows. The domestic serfs were crowding in the
hall, waiting to bid good-by to the young prince. The members of the
household were all gathered in the reception hall: Michael Ivanovich,
Mademoiselle Bourienne, Princess Mary, and the little princess. Prince
Andrew had been called to his father's study as the latter wished to say goodby to him alone. All were waiting for them to come out.
When Prince Andrew entered the study the old man in his old-age spectacles
and white dressing gown, in which he received no one but his son, sat at the
table writing. He glanced round.
"Going?" And he went on writing.
"I've come to say good-by."
"Kiss me here," and he touched his cheek: "Thanks, thanks!"
"What do you thank me for?"
"For not dilly-dallying and not hanging to a woman's apron strings. The
Service before everything. Thanks, thanks!" And he went on writing, so that
his quill spluttered and squeaked. "If you have anything to say, say it. These
two things can be done together," he added.
"About my wife... I am ashamed as it is to leave her on your hands..."
"Why talk nonsense? Say what you want."
"When her confinement is due, send to Moscow for an accoucheur.... Let him
be here...."
The old prince stopped writing and, as if not understanding, fixed his stern
eyes on his son.
"I know that no one can help if nature does not do her work," said Prince
Andrew, evidently confused. "I know that out of a million cases only one goes
wrong, but it is her fancy and mine. They have been telling her things. She has
had a dream and is frightened."
"Hm... Hm..." muttered the old prince to himself, finishing what he was
writing. "I'll do it."
He signed with a flourish and suddenly turning to his son began to laugh.
"It's a bad business, eh?"
"What is bad, Father?"
"The wife!" said the old prince, briefly and significantly.
"I don't understand!" said Prince Andrew.
"No, it can't be helped, lad," said the prince. "They're all like that; one can't
unmarry. Don't be afraid; I won't tell anyone, but you know it yourself."
He seized his son by the hand with small bony fingers, shook it, looked
straight into his son's face with keen eyes which seemed to see through him,
and again laughed his frigid laugh.
The son sighed, thus admitting that his father had understood him. The old
man continued to fold and seal his letter, snatching up and throwing down the
wax, the seal, and the paper, with his accustomed rapidity.
"What's to be done? She's pretty! I will do everything. Make your mind easy,"
said he in abrupt sentences while sealing his letter.
Andrew did not speak; he was both pleased and displeased that his father
understood him. The old man got up and gave the letter to his son.
"Listen!" said he; "don't worry about your wife: what can be done shall be.
Now listen! Give this letter to Michael Ilarionovich. * I have written that he
should make use of you in proper places and not keep you long as an adjutant:
a bad position! Tell him I remember and like him. Write and tell me how he
receives you. If he is all right—serve him. Nicholas Bolkonski's son need not
serve under anyone if he is in disfavor. Now come here."
*Kutuzov.
He spoke so rapidly that he did not finish half his words, but his son was
accustomed to understand him. He led him to the desk, raised the lid, drew out
a drawer, and took out an exercise book filled with his bold, tall, close
handwriting.
"I shall probably die before you. So remember, these are my memoirs; hand
them to the Emperor after my death. Now here is a Lombard bond and a letter;
it is a premium for the man who writes a history of Suvorov's wars. Send it to
the Academy. Here are some jottings for you to read when I am gone. You will
find them useful."
Andrew did not tell his father that he would no doubt live a long time yet. He
felt that he must not say it.
"I will do it all, Father," he said.
"Well, now, good-by!" He gave his son his hand to kiss, and embraced him.
"Remember this, Prince Andrew, if they kill you it will hurt me, your old
father..." he paused unexpectedly, and then in a querulous voice suddenly
shrieked: "but if I hear that you have not behaved like a son of Nicholas
Bolkonski, I shall be ashamed!"
"You need not have said that to me, Father," said the son with a smile.
The old man was silent.
"I also wanted to ask you," continued Prince Andrew, "if I'm killed and if I
have a son, do not let him be taken away from you—as I said yesterday... let
him grow up with you.... Please."
"Not let the wife have him?" said the old man, and laughed.
They stood silent, facing one another. The old man's sharp eyes were fixed
straight on his son's. Something twitched in the lower part of the old prince's
face.
"We've said good-by. Go!" he suddenly shouted in a loud, angry voice,
opening his door.
"What is it? What?" asked both princesses when they saw for a moment at the
door Prince Andrew and the figure of the old man in a white dressing gown,
spectacled and wigless, shouting in an angry voice.
Prince Andrew sighed and made no reply.
"Well!" he said, turning to his wife.
And this "Well!" sounded coldly ironic, as if he were saying,: "Now go
through your performance."
"Andrew, already!" said the little princess, turning pale and looking with
dismay at her husband.
He embraced her. She screamed and fell unconscious on his shoulder.
He cautiously released the shoulder she leaned on, looked into her face, and
carefully placed her in an easy chair.
"Adieu, Mary," said he gently to his sister, taking her by the hand and kissing
her, and then he left the room with rapid steps.
The little princess lay in the armchair, Mademoiselle Bourienne chafing her
temples. Princess Mary, supporting her sister-in-law, still looked with her
beautiful eyes full of tears at the door through which Prince Andrew had gone
and made the sign of the cross in his direction. From the study, like pistol
shots, came the frequent sound of the old man angrily blowing his nose.
Hardly had Prince Andrew gone when the study door opened quickly and the
stern figure of the old man in the white dressing gown looked out.
"Gone? That's all right!" said he; and looking angrily at the unconscious little
princess, he shook his head reprovingly and slammed the door.
BOOK TWO: 1805
CHAPTER I
In October, 1805, a Russian army was occupying the villages and towns of the
Archduchy of Austria, and yet other regiments freshly arriving from Russia
were settling near the fortress of Braunau and burdening the inhabitants on
whom they were quartered. Braunau was the headquarters of the commanderin-chief, Kutuzov.
On October 11, 1805, one of the infantry regiments that had just reached
Braunau had halted half a mile from the town, waiting to be inspected by the
commander-in-chief. Despite the un-Russian appearance of the locality and
surroundings—fruit gardens, stone fences, tiled roofs, and hills in the distance
—and despite the fact that the inhabitants (who gazed with curiosity at the
soldiers) were not Russians, the regiment had just the appearance of any
Russian regiment preparing for an inspection anywhere in the heart of Russia.
On the evening of the last day's march an order had been received that the
commander-in-chief would inspect the regiment on the march. Though the
words of the order were not clear to the regimental commander, and the
question arose whether the troops were to be in marching order or not, it was
decided at a consultation between the battalion commanders to present the
regiment in parade order, on the principle that it is always better to "bow too
low than not bow low enough." So the soldiers, after a twenty-mile march,
were kept mending and cleaning all night long without closing their eyes,
while the adjutants and company commanders calculated and reckoned, and
by morning the regiment—instead of the straggling, disorderly crowd it had
been on its last march the day before—presented a well-ordered array of two
thousand men each of whom knew his place and his duty, had every button
and every strap in place, and shone with cleanliness. And not only externally
was all in order, but had it pleased the commander-in-chief to look under the
uniforms he would have found on every man a clean shirt, and in every
knapsack the appointed number of articles, "awl, soap, and all," as the soldiers
say. There was only one circumstance concerning which no one could be at
ease. It was the state of the soldiers' boots. More than half the men's boots
were in holes. But this defect was not due to any fault of the regimental
commander, for in spite of repeated demands boots had not been issued by the
Austrian commissariat, and the regiment had marched some seven hundred
miles.
The commander of the regiment was an elderly, choleric, stout, and thick-set
general with grizzled eyebrows and whiskers, and wider from chest to back
than across the shoulders. He had on a brand-new uniform showing the creases
where it had been folded and thick gold epaulettes which seemed to stand
rather than lie down on his massive shoulders. He had the air of a man happily
performing one of the most solemn duties of his life. He walked about in front
of the line and at every step pulled himself up, slightly arching his back. It was
plain that the commander admired his regiment, rejoiced in it, and that his
whole mind was engrossed by it, yet his strut seemed to indicate that, besides
military matters, social interests and the fair sex occupied no small part of his
thoughts.
"Well, Michael Mitrich, sir?" he said, addressing one of the battalion
commanders who smilingly pressed forward (it was plain that they both felt
happy). "We had our hands full last night. However, I think the regiment is not
a bad one, eh?"
The battalion commander perceived the jovial irony and laughed.
"It would not be turned off the field even on the Tsaritsin Meadow."
"What?" asked the commander.
At that moment, on the road from the town on which signalers had been
posted, two men appeared on horse back. They were an aide-de-camp
followed by a Cossack.
The aide-de-camp was sent to confirm the order which had not been clearly
worded the day before, namely, that the commander-in-chief wished to see the
regiment just in the state in which it had been on the march: in their greatcoats,
and packs, and without any preparation whatever.
A member of the Hofkriegsrath from Vienna had come to Kutuzov the day
before with proposals and demands for him to join up with the army of the
Archduke Ferdinand and Mack, and Kutuzov, not considering this junction
advisable, meant, among other arguments in support of his view, to show the
Austrian general the wretched state in which the troops arrived from Russia.
With this object he intended to meet the regiment; so the worse the condition it
was in, the better pleased the commander-in-chief would be. Though the aidede-camp did not know these circumstances, he nevertheless delivered the
definite order that the men should be in their greatcoats and in marching order,
and that the commander-in-chief would otherwise be dissatisfied. On hearing
this the regimental commander hung his head, silently shrugged his shoulders,
and spread out his arms with a choleric gesture.
"A fine mess we've made of it!" he remarked.
"There now! Didn't I tell you, Michael Mitrich, that if it was said 'on the
march' it meant in greatcoats?" said he reproachfully to the battalion
commander. "Oh, my God!" he added, stepping resolutely forward. "Company
commanders!" he shouted in a voice accustomed to command. "Sergeants
major!... How soon will he be here?" he asked the aide-de-camp with a
respectful politeness evidently relating to the personage he was referring to.
"In an hour's time, I should say."
"Shall we have time to change clothes?"
"I don't know, General...."
The regimental commander, going up to the line himself, ordered the soldiers
to change into their greatcoats. The company commanders ran off to their
companies, the sergeants major began bustling (the greatcoats were not in very
good condition), and instantly the squares that had up to then been in regular
order and silent began to sway and stretch and hum with voices. On all sides
soldiers were running to and fro, throwing up their knapsacks with a jerk of
their shoulders and pulling the straps over their heads, unstrapping their
overcoats and drawing the sleeves on with upraised arms.
In half an hour all was again in order, only the squares had become gray
instead of black. The regimental commander walked with his jerky steps to the
front of the regiment and examined it from a distance.
"Whatever is this? This!" he shouted and stood still. "Commander of the third
company!"
"Commander of the third company wanted by the general!... commander to the
general... third company to the commander." The words passed along the lines
and an adjutant ran to look for the missing officer.
When the eager but misrepeated words had reached their destination in a cry
of: "The general to the third company," the missing officer appeared from
behind his company and, though he was a middle-aged man and not in the
habit of running, trotted awkwardly stumbling on his toes toward the general.
The captain's face showed the uneasiness of a schoolboy who is told to repeat
a lesson he has not learned. Spots appeared on his nose, the redness of which
was evidently due to intemperance, and his mouth twitched nervously. The
general looked the captain up and down as he came up panting, slackening his
pace as he approached.
"You will soon be dressing your men in petticoats! What is this?" shouted the
regimental commander, thrusting forward his jaw and pointing at a soldier in
the ranks of the third company in a greatcoat of bluish cloth, which contrasted
with the others. "What have you been after? The commander in chief is
expected and you leave your place? Eh? I'll teach you to dress the men in
fancy coats for a parade.... Eh...?"
The commander of the company, with his eyes fixed on his superior, pressed
two fingers more and more rigidly to his cap, as if in this pressure lay his only
hope of salvation.
"Well, why don't you speak? Whom have you got there dressed up as a
Hungarian?" said the commander with an austere gibe.
"Your excellency..."
"Well, your excellency, what? Your excellency! But what about your
excellency?... nobody knows."
"Your excellency, it's the officer Dolokhov, who has been reduced to the
ranks," said the captain softly.
"Well? Has he been degraded into a field marshal, or into a soldier? If a
soldier, he should be dressed in regulation uniform like the others."
"Your excellency, you gave him leave yourself, on the march."
"Gave him leave? Leave? That's just like you young men," said the regimental
commander cooling down a little. "Leave indeed.... One says a word to you
and you... What?" he added with renewed irritation, "I beg you to dress your
men decently."
And the commander, turning to look at the adjutant, directed his jerky steps
down the line. He was evidently pleased at his own display of anger and
walking up to the regiment wished to find a further excuse for wrath. Having
snapped at an officer for an unpolished badge, at another because his line was
not straight, he reached the third company.
"H-o-o-w are you standing? Where's your leg? Your leg?" shouted the
commander with a tone of suffering in his voice, while there were still five
men between him and Dolokhov with his bluish-gray uniform.
Dolokhov slowly straightened his bent knee, looking straight with his clear,
insolent eyes in the general's face.
"Why a blue coat? Off with it... Sergeant major! Change his coat... the ras..."
he did not finish.
"General, I must obey orders, but I am not bound to endure..." Dolokhov
hurriedly interrupted.
"No talking in the ranks!... No talking, no talking!"
"Not bound to endure insults," Dolokhov concluded in loud, ringing tones.
The eyes of the general and the soldier met. The general became silent, angrily
pulling down his tight scarf.
"I request you to have the goodness to change your coat," he said as he turned
away.
CHAPTER II
"He's coming!" shouted the signaler at that moment.
The regimental commander, flushing, ran to his horse, seized the stirrup with
trembling hands, threw his body across the saddle, righted himself, drew his
saber, and with a happy and resolute countenance, opening his mouth awry,
prepared to shout. The regiment fluttered like a bird preening its plumage and
became motionless.
"Att-ention!" shouted the regimental commander in a soul-shaking voice
which expressed joy for himself, severity for the regiment, and welcome for
the approaching chief.
Along the broad country road, edged on both sides by trees, came a high, light
blue Viennese caleche, slightly creaking on its springs and drawn by six horses
at a smart trot. Behind the caleche galloped the suite and a convoy of Croats.
Beside Kutuzov sat an Austrian general, in a white uniform that looked
strange among the Russian black ones. The caleche stopped in front of the
regiment. Kutuzov and the Austrian general were talking in low voices and
Kutuzov smiled slightly as treading heavily he stepped down from the carriage
just as if those two thousand men breathlessly gazing at him and the
regimental commander did not exist.
The word of command rang out, and again the regiment quivered, as with a
jingling sound it presented arms. Then amidst a dead silence the feeble voice
of the commander-in-chief was heard. The regiment roared, "Health to your
ex... len... len... lency!" and again all became silent. At first Kutuzov stood still
while the regiment moved; then he and the general in white, accompanied by
the suite, walked between the ranks.
From the way the regimental commander saluted the commander-in-chief and
devoured him with his eyes, drawing himself up obsequiously, and from the
way he walked through the ranks behind the generals, bending forward and
hardly able to restrain his jerky movements, and from the way he darted
forward at every word or gesture of the commander-in-chief, it was evident
that he performed his duty as a subordinate with even greater zeal than his
duty as a commander. Thanks to the strictness and assiduity of its commander
the regiment, in comparison with others that had reached Braunau at the same
time, was in splendid condition. There were only 217 sick and stragglers.
Everything was in good order except the boots.
Kutuzov walked through the ranks, sometimes stopping to say a few friendly
words to officers he had known in the Turkish war, sometimes also to the
soldiers. Looking at their boots he several times shook his head sadly, pointing
them out to the Austrian general with an expression which seemed to say that
he was not blaming anyone, but could not help noticing what a bad state of
things it was. The regimental commander ran forward on each such occasion,
fearing to miss a single word of the commander-in-chief's regarding the
regiment. Behind Kutuzov, at a distance that allowed every softly spoken word
to be heard, followed some twenty men of his suite. These gentlemen talked
among themselves and sometimes laughed. Nearest of all to the commanderin-chief walked a handsome adjutant. This was Prince Bolkonski. Beside him
was his comrade Nesvitski, a tall staff officer, extremely stout, with a kindly,
smiling, handsome face and moist eyes. Nesvitski could hardly keep from
laughter provoked by a swarthy hussar officer who walked beside him. This
hussar, with a grave face and without a smile or a change in the expression of
his fixed eyes, watched the regimental commander's back and mimicked his
every movement. Each time the commander started and bent forward, the
hussar started and bent forward in exactly the same manner. Nesvitski laughed
and nudged the others to make them look at the wag.
Kutuzov walked slowly and languidly past thousands of eyes which were
starting from their sockets to watch their chief. On reaching the third company
he suddenly stopped. His suite, not having expected this, involuntarily came
closer to him.
"Ah, Timokhin!" said he, recognizing the red-nosed captain who had been
reprimanded on account of the blue greatcoat.
One would have thought it impossible for a man to stretch himself more than
Timokhin had done when he was reprimanded by the regimental commander,
but now that the commander-in-chief addressed him he drew himself up to
such an extent that it seemed he could not have sustained it had the
commander-in-chief continued to look at him, and so Kutuzov, who evidently
understood his case and wished him nothing but good, quickly turned away, a
scarcely perceptible smile flitting over his scarred and puffy face.
"Another Ismail comrade," said he. "A brave officer! Are you satisfied with
him?" he asked the regimental commander.
And the latter—unconscious that he was being reflected in the hussar officer
as in a looking glass—started, moved forward, and answered: "Highly
satisfied, your excellency!"
"We all have our weaknesses," said Kutuzov smiling and walking away from
him. "He used to have a predilection for Bacchus."
The regimental commander was afraid he might be blamed for this and did not
answer. The hussar at that moment noticed the face of the red-nosed captain
and his drawn-in stomach, and mimicked his expression and pose with such
exactitude that Nesvitski could not help laughing. Kutuzov turned round. The
officer evidently had complete control of his face, and while Kutuzov was
turning managed to make a grimace and then assume a most serious,
deferential, and innocent expression.
The third company was the last, and Kutuzov pondered, apparently trying to
recollect something. Prince Andrew stepped forward from among the suite and
said in French:
"You told me to remind you of the officer Dolokhov, reduced to the ranks in
this regiment."
"Where is Dolokhov?" asked Kutuzov.
Dolokhov, who had already changed into a soldier's gray greatcoat, did not
wait to be called. The shapely figure of the fair-haired soldier, with his clear
blue eyes, stepped forward from the ranks, went up to the commander in chief,
and presented arms.
"Have you a complaint to make?" Kutuzov asked with a slight frown.
"This is Dolokhov," said Prince Andrew.
"Ah!" said Kutuzov. "I hope this will be a lesson to you. Do your duty. The
Emperor is gracious, and I shan't forget you if you deserve well."
The clear blue eyes looked at the commander-in-chief just as boldly as they
had looked at the regimental commander, seeming by their expression to tear
open the veil of convention that separates a commander-in-chief so widely
from a private.
"One thing I ask of your excellency," Dolokhov said in his firm, ringing,
deliberate voice. "I ask an opportunity to atone for my fault and prove my
devotion to His Majesty the Emperor and to Russia!"
Kutuzov turned away. The same smile of the eyes with which he had turned
from Captain Timokhin again flitted over his face. He turned away with a
grimace as if to say that everything Dolokhov had said to him and everything
he could say had long been known to him, that he was weary of it and it was
not at all what he wanted. He turned away and went to the carriage.
The regiment broke up into companies, which went to their appointed quarters
near Braunau, where they hoped to receive boots and clothes and to rest after
their hard marches.
"You won't bear me a grudge, Prokhor Ignatych?" said the regimental
commander, overtaking the third company on its way to its quarters and riding
up to Captain Timokhin who was walking in front. (The regimental
commander's face now that the inspection was happily over beamed with
irrepressible delight.) "It's in the Emperor's service... it can't be helped... one is
sometimes a bit hasty on parade... I am the first to apologize, you know me!...
He was very pleased!" And he held out his hand to the captain.
"Don't mention it, General, as if I'd be so bold!" replied the captain, his nose
growing redder as he gave a smile which showed where two front teeth were
missing that had been knocked out by the butt end of a gun at Ismail.
"And tell Mr. Dolokhov that I won't forget him—he may be quite easy. And
tell me, please—I've been meaning to ask—how is he behaving himself, and
in general..."
"As far as the service goes he is quite punctilious, your excellency; but his
character..." said Timokhin.
"And what about his character?" asked the regimental commander.
"It's different on different days," answered the captain. "One day he is
sensible, well educated, and good-natured, and the next he's a wild beast.... In
Poland, if you please, he nearly killed a Jew."
"Oh, well, well!" remarked the regimental commander. "Still, one must have
pity on a young man in misfortune. You know he has important connections...
Well, then, you just..."
"I will, your excellency," said Timokhin, showing by his smile that he
understood his commander's wish.
"Well, of course, of course!"
The regimental commander sought out Dolokhov in the ranks and, reining in
his horse, said to him:
"After the next affair... epaulettes."
Dolokhov looked round but did not say anything, nor did the mocking smile
on his lips change.
"Well, that's all right," continued the regimental commander. "A cup of vodka
for the men from me," he added so that the soldiers could hear. "I thank you
all! God be praised!" and he rode past that company and overtook the next
one.
"Well, he's really a good fellow, one can serve under him," said Timokhin to
the subaltern beside him.
"In a word, a hearty one..." said the subaltern, laughing (the regimental
commander was nicknamed King of Hearts).
The cheerful mood of their officers after the inspection infected the soldiers.
The company marched on gaily. The soldiers' voices could be heard on every
side.
"And they said Kutuzov was blind of one eye?"
"And so he is! Quite blind!"
"No, friend, he is sharper-eyed than you are. Boots and leg bands... he noticed
everything..."
"When he looked at my feet, friend... well, thinks I..."
"And that other one with him, the Austrian, looked as if he were smeared with
chalk—as white as flour! I suppose they polish him up as they do the guns."
"I say, Fedeshon!... Did he say when the battles are to begin? You were near
him. Everybody said that Buonaparte himself was at Braunau."
"Buonaparte himself!... Just listen to the fool, what he doesn't know! The
Prussians are up in arms now. The Austrians, you see, are putting them down.
When they've been put down, the war with Buonaparte will begin. And he
says Buonaparte is in Braunau! Shows you're a fool. You'd better listen more
carefully!"
"What devils these quartermasters are! See, the fifth company is turning into
the village already... they will have their buckwheat cooked before we reach
our quarters."
"Give me a biscuit, you devil!"
"And did you give me tobacco yesterday? That's just it, friend! Ah, well, never
mind, here you are."
"They might call a halt here or we'll have to do another four miles without
eating."
"Wasn't it fine when those Germans gave us lifts! You just sit still and are
drawn along."
"And here, friend, the people are quite beggarly. There they all seemed to be
Poles—all under the Russian crown—but here they're all regular Germans."
"Singers to the front" came the captain's order.
And from the different ranks some twenty men ran to the front. A drummer,
their leader, turned round facing the singers, and flourishing his arm, began a
long-drawn-out soldiers' song, commencing with the words: "Morning
dawned, the sun was rising," and concluding: "On then, brothers, on to glory,
led by Father Kamenski." This song had been composed in the Turkish
campaign and now being sung in Austria, the only change being that the words
"Father Kamenski" were replaced by "Father Kutuzov."
Having jerked out these last words as soldiers do and waved his arms as if
flinging something to the ground, the drummer—a lean, handsome soldier of
forty—looked sternly at the singers and screwed up his eyes. Then having
satisfied himself that all eyes were fixed on him, he raised both arms as if
carefully lifting some invisible but precious object above his head and, holding
it there for some seconds, suddenly flung it down and began:
"Oh, my bower, oh, my bower...!"
"Oh, my bower new...!" chimed in twenty voices, and the castanet player, in
spite of the burden of his equipment, rushed out to the front and, walking
backwards before the company, jerked his shoulders and flourished his
castanets as if threatening someone. The soldiers, swinging their arms and
keeping time spontaneously, marched with long steps. Behind the company the
sound of wheels, the creaking of springs, and the tramp of horses' hoofs were
heard. Kutuzov and his suite were returning to the town. The commander-inchief made a sign that the men should continue to march at ease, and he and
all his suite showed pleasure at the sound of the singing and the sight of the
dancing soldier and the gay and smartly marching men. In the second file from
the right flank, beside which the carriage passed the company, a blue-eyed
soldier involuntarily attracted notice. It was Dolokhov marching with
particular grace and boldness in time to the song and looking at those driving
past as if he pitied all who were not at that moment marching with the
company. The hussar cornet of Kutuzov's suite who had mimicked the
regimental commander, fell back from the carriage and rode up to Dolokhov.
Hussar cornet Zherkov had at one time, in Petersburg, belonged to the wild set
led by Dolokhov. Zherkov had met Dolokhov abroad as a private and had not
seen fit to recognize him. But now that Kutuzov had spoken to the gentleman
ranker, he addressed him with the cordiality of an old friend.
"My dear fellow, how are you?" said he through the singing, making his horse
keep pace with the company.
"How am I?" Dolokhov answered coldly. "I am as you see."
The lively song gave a special flavor to the tone of free and easy gaiety with
which Zherkov spoke, and to the intentional coldness of Dolokhov's reply.
"And how do you get on with the officers?" inquired Zherkov.
"All right. They are good fellows. And how have you wriggled onto the staff?"
"I was attached; I'm on duty."
Both were silent.
"She let the hawk fly upward from her wide right sleeve," went the song,
arousing an involuntary sensation of courage and cheerfulness. Their
conversation would probably have been different but for the effect of that
song.
"Is it true that Austrians have been beaten?" asked Dolokhov.
"The devil only knows! They say so."
"I'm glad," answered Dolokhov briefly and clearly, as the song demanded.
"I say, come round some evening and we'll have a game of faro!" said
Zherkov.
"Why, have you too much money?"
"Do come."
"I can't. I've sworn not to. I won't drink and won't play till I get reinstated."
"Well, that's only till the first engagement."
"We shall see."
They were again silent.
"Come if you need anything. One can at least be of use on the staff..."
Dolokhov smiled. "Don't trouble. If I want anything, I won't beg—I'll take it!"
"Well, never mind; I only..."
"And I only..."
"Good-bye."
"Good health..."
"It's a long, long way.
To my native land..."
Zherkov touched his horse with the spurs; it pranced excitedly from foot to
foot uncertain with which to start, then settled down, galloped past the
company, and overtook the carriage, still keeping time to the song.
CHAPTER III
On returning from the review, Kutuzov took the Austrian general into his
private room and, calling his adjutant, asked for some papers relating to the
condition of the troops on their arrival, and the letters that had come from the
Archduke Ferdinand, who was in command of the advanced army. Prince
Andrew Bolkonski came into the room with the required papers. Kutuzov and
the Austrian member of the Hofkriegsrath were sitting at the table on which a
plan was spread out.
"Ah!..." said Kutuzov glancing at Bolkonski as if by this exclamation he was
asking the adjutant to wait, and he went on with the conversation in French.
"All I can say, General," said he with a pleasant elegance of expression and
intonation that obliged one to listen to each deliberately spoken word. It was
evident that Kutuzov himself listened with pleasure to his own voice. "All I
can say, General, is that if the matter depended on my personal wishes, the
will of His Majesty the Emperor Francis would have been fulfilled long ago. I
should long ago have joined the archduke. And believe me on my honour that
to me personally it would be a pleasure to hand over the supreme command of
the army into the hands of a better informed and more skillful general—of
whom Austria has so many—and to lay down all this heavy responsibility. But
circumstances are sometimes too strong for us, General."
And Kutuzov smiled in a way that seemed to say, "You are quite at liberty not
to believe me and I don't even care whether you do or not, but you have no
grounds for telling me so. And that is the whole point."
The Austrian general looked dissatisfied, but had no option but to reply in the
same tone.
"On the contrary," he said, in a querulous and angry tone that contrasted with
his flattering words, "on the contrary, your excellency's participation in the
common action is highly valued by His Majesty; but we think the present
delay is depriving the splendid Russian troops and their commander of the
laurels they have been accustomed to win in their battles," he concluded his
evidently prearranged sentence.
Kutuzov bowed with the same smile.
"But that is my conviction, and judging by the last letter with which His
Highness the Archduke Ferdinand has honored me, I imagine that the Austrian
troops, under the direction of so skillful a leader as General Mack, have by
now already gained a decisive victory and no longer need our aid," said
Kutuzov.
The general frowned. Though there was no definite news of an Austrian
defeat, there were many circumstances confirming the unfavorable rumors that
were afloat, and so Kutuzov's suggestion of an Austrian victory sounded much
like irony. But Kutuzov went on blandly smiling with the same expression,
which seemed to say that he had a right to suppose so. And, in fact, the last
letter he had received from Mack's army informed him of a victory and stated
strategically the position of the army was very favorable.
"Give me that letter," said Kutuzov turning to Prince Andrew. "Please have a
look at it"—and Kutuzov with an ironical smile about the corners of his mouth
read to the Austrian general the following passage, in German, from the
Archduke Ferdinand's letter:
We have fully concentrated forces of nearly seventy thousand men with which
to attack and defeat the enemy should he cross the Lech. Also, as we are
masters of Ulm, we cannot be deprived of the advantage of commanding both
sides of the Danube, so that should the enemy not cross the Lech, we can cross
the Danube, throw ourselves on his line of communications, recross the river
lower down, and frustrate his intention should he try to direct his whole force
against our faithful ally. We shall therefore confidently await the moment
when the Imperial Russian army will be fully equipped, and shall then, in
conjunction with it, easily find a way to prepare for the enemy the fate he
deserves.
Kutuzov sighed deeply on finishing this paragraph and looked at the member
of the Hofkriegsrath mildly and attentively.
"But you know the wise maxim your excellency, advising one to expect the
worst," said the Austrian general, evidently wishing to have done with jests
and to come to business. He involuntarily looked round at the aide-de-camp.
"Excuse me, General," interrupted Kutuzov, also turning to Prince Andrew.
"Look here, my dear fellow, get from Kozlovski all the reports from our
scouts. Here are two letters from Count Nostitz and here is one from His
Highness the Archduke Ferdinand and here are these," he said, handing him
several papers, "make a neat memorandum in French out of all this, showing
all the news we have had of the movements of the Austrian army, and then
give it to his excellency."
Prince Andrew bowed his head in token of having understood from the first
not only what had been said but also what Kutuzov would have liked to tell
him. He gathered up the papers and with a bow to both, stepped softly over the
carpet and went out into the waiting room.
Though not much time had passed since Prince Andrew had left Russia, he
had changed greatly during that period. In the expression of his face, in his
movements, in his walk, scarcely a trace was left of his former affected
languor and indolence. He now looked like a man who has time to think of the
impression he makes on others, but is occupied with agreeable and interesting
work. His face expressed more satisfaction with himself and those around him,
his smile and glance were brighter and more attractive.
Kutuzov, whom he had overtaken in Poland, had received him very kindly,
promised not to forget him, distinguished him above the other adjutants, and
had taken him to Vienna and given him the more serious commissions. From
Vienna Kutuzov wrote to his old comrade, Prince Andrew's father.
Your son bids fair to become an officer distinguished by his industry, firmness,
and expedition. I consider myself fortunate to have such a subordinate by me.
On Kutuzov's staff, among his fellow officers and in the army generally,
Prince Andrew had, as he had had in Petersburg society, two quite opposite
reputations. Some, a minority, acknowledged him to be different from
themselves and from everyone else, expected great things of him, listened to
him, admired, and imitated him, and with them Prince Andrew was natural
and pleasant. Others, the majority, disliked him and considered him conceited,
cold, and disagreeable. But among these people Prince Andrew knew how to
take his stand so that they respected and even feared him.
Coming out of Kutuzov's room into the waiting room with the papers in his
hand Prince Andrew came up to his comrade, the aide-de-camp on duty,
Kozlovski, who was sitting at the window with a book.
"Well, Prince?" asked Kozlovski.
"I am ordered to write a memorandum explaining why we are not advancing."
"And why is it?"
Prince Andrew shrugged his shoulders.
"Any news from Mack?"
"No."
"If it were true that he has been beaten, news would have come."
"Probably," said Prince Andrew moving toward the outer door.
But at that instant a tall Austrian general in a greatcoat, with the order of
Maria Theresa on his neck and a black bandage round his head, who had
evidently just arrived, entered quickly, slamming the door. Prince Andrew
stopped short.
"Commander in Chief Kutuzov?" said the newly arrived general speaking
quickly with a harsh German accent, looking to both sides and advancing
straight toward the inner door.
"The commander-in-chief is engaged," said Kozlovski, going hurriedly up to
the unknown general and blocking his way to the door. "Whom shall I
announce?"
The unknown general looked disdainfully down at Kozlovski, who was rather
short, as if surprised that anyone should not know him.
"The commander-in-chief is engaged," repeated Kozlovski calmly.
The general's face clouded, his lips quivered and trembled. He took out a
notebook, hurriedly scribbled something in pencil, tore out the leaf, gave it to
Kozlovski, stepped quickly to the window, and threw himself into a chair,
gazing at those in the room as if asking, "Why do they look at me?" Then he
lifted his head, stretched his neck as if he intended to say something, but
immediately, with affected indifference, began to hum to himself, producing a
queer sound which immediately broke off. The door of the private room
opened and Kutuzov appeared in the doorway. The general with the bandaged
head bent forward as though running away from some danger, and, making
long, quick strides with his thin legs, went up to Kutuzov.
"Vous voyez le malheureux Mack," he uttered in a broken voice.
Kutuzov's face as he stood in the open doorway remained perfectly immobile
for a few moments. Then wrinkles ran over his face like a wave and his
forehead became smooth again, he bowed his head respectfully, closed his
eyes, silently let Mack enter his room before him, and closed the door himself
behind him.
The report which had been circulated that the Austrians had been beaten and
that the whole army had surrendered at Ulm proved to be correct. Within half
an hour adjutants had been sent in various directions with orders which
showed that the Russian troops, who had hitherto been inactive, would also
soon have to meet the enemy.
Prince Andrew was one of those rare staff officers whose chief interest lay in
the general progress of the war. When he saw Mack and heard the details of
his disaster he understood that half the campaign was lost, understood all the
difficulties of the Russian army's position, and vividly imagined what awaited
it and the part he would have to play. Involuntarily he felt a joyful agitation at
the thought of the humiliation of arrogant Austria and that in a week's time he
might, perhaps, see and take part in the first Russian encounter with the
French since Suvorov met them. He feared that Bonaparte's genius might
outweigh all the courage of the Russian troops, and at the same time could not
admit the idea of his hero being disgraced.
Excited and irritated by these thoughts Prince Andrew went toward his room
to write to his father, to whom he wrote every day. In the corridor he met
Nesvitski, with whom he shared a room, and the wag Zherkov; they were as
usual laughing.
"Why are you so glum?" asked Nesvitski noticing Prince Andrew's pale face
and glittering eyes.
"There's nothing to be gay about," answered Bolkonski.
Just as Prince Andrew met Nesvitski and Zherkov, there came toward them
from the other end of the corridor, Strauch, an Austrian general who on
Kutuzov's staff in charge of the provisioning of the Russian army, and the
member of the Hofkriegsrath who had arrived the previous evening. There was
room enough in the wide corridor for the generals to pass the three officers
quite easily, but Zherkov, pushing Nesvitski aside with his arm, said in a
breathless voice,
"They're coming!... they're coming!... Stand aside, make way, please make
way!"
The generals were passing by, looking as if they wished to avoid embarrassing
attentions. On the face of the wag Zherkov there suddenly appeared a stupid
smile of glee which he seemed unable to suppress.
"Your excellency," said he in German, stepping forward and addressing the
Austrian general, "I have the honor to congratulate you."
He bowed his head and scraped first with one foot and then with the other,
awkwardly, like a child at a dancing lesson.
The member of the Hofkriegsrath looked at him severely but, seeing the
seriousness of his stupid smile, could not but give him a moment's attention.
He screwed up his eyes showing that he was listening.
"I have the honor to congratulate you. General Mack has arrived, quite well,
only a little bruised just here," he added, pointing with a beaming smile to his
head.
The general frowned, turned away, and went on.
"Gott, wie naiv!" * said he angrily, after he had gone a few steps.
* "Good God, what simplicity!"
Nesvitski with a laugh threw his arms round Prince Andrew, but Bolkonski,
turning still paler, pushed him away with an angry look and turned to Zherkov.
The nervous irritation aroused by the appearance of Mack, the news of his
defeat, and the thought of what lay before the Russian army found vent in
anger at Zherkov's untimely jest.
"If you, sir, choose to make a buffoon of yourself," he said sharply, with a
slight trembling of the lower jaw, "I can't prevent your doing so; but I warn
you that if you dare to play the fool in my presence, I will teach you to behave
yourself."
Nesvitski and Zherkov were so surprised by this outburst that they gazed at
Bolkonski silently with wide-open eyes.
"What's the matter? I only congratulated them," said Zherkov.
"I am not jesting with you; please be silent!" cried Bolkonski, and taking
Nesvitski's arm he left Zherkov, who did not know what to say.
"Come, what's the matter, old fellow?" said Nesvitski trying to soothe him.
"What's the matter?" exclaimed Prince Andrew standing still in his
excitement. "Don't you understand that either we are officers serving our Tsar
and our country, rejoicing in the successes and grieving at the misfortunes of
our common cause, or we are merely lackeys who care nothing for their
master's business. Quarante mille hommes massacres et l'armee de nos allies
detruite, et vous trouvez la le mot pour rire," * he said, as if strengthening his
views by this French sentence. "C'est bien pour un garcon de rien comme cet
individu dont vous avez fait un ami, mais pas pour vous, pas pour vous. *(2)
Only a hobbledehoy could amuse himself in this way," he added in Russian—
but pronouncing the word with a French accent—having noticed that Zherkov
could still hear him.
* "Forty thousand men massacred and the army of our allies
destroyed, and you find that a cause for jesting!"
* (2) "It is all very well for that good-for-nothing fellow
of whom you have made a friend, but not for you, not for
you."
He waited a moment to see whether the cornet would answer, but he turned
and went out of the corridor.
CHAPTER IV
The Pavlograd Hussars were stationed two miles from Braunau. The squadron
in which Nicholas Rostov served as a cadet was quartered in the German
village of Salzeneck. The best quarters in the village were assigned to cavalrycaptain Denisov, the squadron commander, known throughout the whole
cavalry division as Vaska Denisov. Cadet Rostov, ever since he had overtaken
the regiment in Poland, had lived with the squadron commander.
On October 11, the day when all was astir at headquarters over the news of
Mack's defeat, the camp life of the officers of this squadron was proceeding as
usual. Denisov, who had been losing at cards all night, had not yet come home
when Rostov rode back early in the morning from a foraging expedition.
Rostov in his cadet uniform, with a jerk to his horse, rode up to the porch,
swung his leg over the saddle with a supple youthful movement, stood for a
moment in the stirrup as if loathe to part from his horse, and at last sprang
down and called to his orderly.
"Ah, Bondarenko, dear friend!" said he to the hussar who rushed up headlong
to the horse. "Walk him up and down, my dear fellow," he continued, with that
gay brotherly cordiality which goodhearted young people show to everyone
when they are happy.
"Yes, your excellency," answered the Ukrainian gaily, tossing his head.
"Mind, walk him up and down well!"
Another hussar also rushed toward the horse, but Bondarenko had already
thrown the reins of the snaffle bridle over the horse's head. It was evident that
the cadet was liberal with his tips and that it paid to serve him. Rostov patted
the horse's neck and then his flank, and lingered for a moment.
"Splendid! What a horse he will be!" he thought with a smile, and holding up
his saber, his spurs jingling, he ran up the steps of the porch. His landlord, who
in a waistcoat and a pointed cap, pitchfork in hand, was clearing manure from
the cowhouse, looked out, and his face immediately brightened on seeing
Rostov. "Schon gut Morgen! Schon gut Morgen!" * he said winking with a
merry smile, evidently pleased to greet the young man.
* "A very good morning! A very good morning!"
"Schon fleissig?" * said Rostov with the same gay brotherly smile which did
not leave his eager face. "Hoch Oestreicher! Hoch Russen! Kaiser Alexander
hoch!" *(2) said he, quoting words often repeated by the German landlord.
* "Busy already?"
* (2) "Hurrah for the Austrians! Hurrah for the Russians!
Hurrah for Emperor Alexander!"
The German laughed, came out of the cowshed, pulled off his cap, and waving
it above his head cried:
"Und die ganze Welt hoch!" *
* "And hurrah for the whole world!"
Rostov waved his cap above his head like the German and cried laughing,
"Und vivat die ganze Welt!" Though neither the German cleaning his cowshed
nor Rostov back with his platoon from foraging for hay had any reason for
rejoicing, they looked at each other with joyful delight and brotherly love,
wagged their heads in token of their mutual affection, and parted smiling, the
German returning to his cowshed and Rostov going to the cottage he occupied
with Denisov.
"What about your master?" he asked Lavrushka, Denisov's orderly, whom all
the regiment knew for a rogue.
"Hasn't been in since the evening. Must have been losing," answered
Lavrushka. "I know by now, if he wins he comes back early to brag about it,
but if he stays out till morning it means he's lost and will come back in a rage.
Will you have coffee?"
"Yes, bring some."
Ten minutes later Lavrushka brought the coffee. "He's coming!" said he. "Now
for trouble!" Rostov looked out of the window and saw Denisov coming
home. Denisov was a small man with a red face, sparkling black eyes, and
black tousled mustache and hair. He wore an unfastened cloak, wide breeches
hanging down in creases, and a crumpled shako on the back of his head. He
came up to the porch gloomily, hanging his head.
"Lavwuska!" he shouted loudly and angrily, "take it off, blockhead!"
"Well, I am taking it off," replied Lavrushka's voice.
"Ah, you're up already," said Denisov, entering the room.
"Long ago," answered Rostov, "I have already been for the hay, and have seen
Fraulein Mathilde."
"Weally! And I've been losing, bwother. I lost yesterday like a damned fool!"
cried Denisov, not pronouncing his r's. "Such ill luck! Such ill luck. As soon as
you left, it began and went on. Hullo there! Tea!"
Puckering up his face though smiling, and showing his short strong teeth, he
began with stubby fingers of both hands to ruffle up his thick tangled black
hair.
"And what devil made me go to that wat?" (an officer nicknamed "the rat") he
said, rubbing his forehead and whole face with both hands. "Just fancy, he
didn't let me win a single cahd, not one cahd."
He took the lighted pipe that was offered to him, gripped it in his fist, and
tapped it on the floor, making the sparks fly, while he continued to shout.
"He lets one win the singles and collahs it as soon as one doubles it; gives the
singles and snatches the doubles!"
He scattered the burning tobacco, smashed the pipe, and threw it away. Then
he remained silent for a while, and all at once looked cheerfully with his
glittering, black eyes at Rostov.
"If at least we had some women here; but there's nothing foh one to do but
dwink. If we could only get to fighting soon. Hullo, who's there?" he said,
turning to the door as he heard a tread of heavy boots and the clinking of spurs
that came to a stop, and a respectful cough.
"The squadron quartermaster!" said Lavrushka.
Denisov's face puckered still more.
"Wetched!" he muttered, throwing down a purse with some gold in it.
"Wostov, deah fellow, just see how much there is left and shove the purse
undah the pillow," he said, and went out to the quartermaster.
Rostov took the money and, mechanically arranging the old and new coins in
separate piles, began counting them.
"Ah! Telyanin! How d'ye do? They plucked me last night," came Denisov's
voice from the next room.
"Where? At Bykov's, at the rat's... I knew it," replied a piping voice, and
Lieutenant Telyanin, a small officer of the same squadron, entered the room.
Rostov thrust the purse under the pillow and shook the damp little hand which
was offered him. Telyanin for some reason had been transferred from the
Guards just before this campaign. He behaved very well in the regiment but
was not liked; Rostov especially detested him and was unable to overcome or
conceal his groundless antipathy to the man.
"Well, young cavalryman, how is my Rook behaving?" he asked. (Rook was a
young horse Telyanin had sold to Rostov.)
The lieutenant never looked the man he was speaking to straight in the face;
his eyes continually wandered from one object to another.
"I saw you riding this morning..." he added.
"Oh, he's all right, a good horse," answered Rostov, though the horse for
which he had paid seven hundred rubbles was not worth half that sum. "He's
begun to go a little lame on the left foreleg," he added.
"The hoof's cracked! That's nothing. I'll teach you what to do and show you
what kind of rivet to use."
"Yes, please do," said Rostov.
"I'll show you, I'll show you! It's not a secret. And it's a horse you'll thank me
for."
"Then I'll have it brought round," said Rostov wishing to avoid Telyanin, and
he went out to give the order.
In the passage Denisov, with a pipe, was squatting on the threshold facing the
quartermaster who was reporting to him. On seeing Rostov, Denisov screwed
up his face and pointing over his shoulder with his thumb to the room where
Telyanin was sitting, he frowned and gave a shudder of disgust.
"Ugh! I don't like that fellow," he said, regardless of the quartermaster's
presence.
Rostov shrugged his shoulders as much as to say: "Nor do I, but what's one to
do?" and, having given his order, he returned to Telyanin.
Telyanin was sitting in the same indolent pose in which Rostov had left him,
rubbing his small white hands.
"Well there certainly are disgusting people," thought Rostov as he entered.
"Have you told them to bring the horse?" asked Telyanin, getting up and
looking carelessly about him.
"I have."
"Let us go ourselves. I only came round to ask Denisov about yesterday's
order. Have you got it, Denisov?"
"Not yet. But where are you off to?"
"I want to teach this young man how to shoe a horse," said Telyanin.
They went through the porch and into the stable. The lieutenant explained how
to rivet the hoof and went away to his own quarters.
When Rostov went back there was a bottle of vodka and a sausage on the
table. Denisov was sitting there scratching with his pen on a sheet of paper. He
looked gloomily in Rostov's face and said: "I am witing to her."
He leaned his elbows on the table with his pen in his hand and, evidently glad
of a chance to say quicker in words what he wanted to write, told Rostov the
contents of his letter.
"You see, my fwiend," he said, "we sleep when we don't love. We are
childwen of the dust... but one falls in love and one is a God, one is pua' as on
the first day of cweation... Who's that now? Send him to the devil, I'm busy!"
he shouted to Lavrushka, who went up to him not in the least abashed.
"Who should it be? You yourself told him to come. It's the quartermaster for
the money."
Denisov frowned and was about to shout some reply but stopped.
"Wetched business," he muttered to himself. "How much is left in the puhse?"
he asked, turning to Rostov.
"Seven new and three old imperials."
"Oh, it's wetched! Well, what are you standing there for, you sca'cwow? Call
the quahtehmasteh," he shouted to Lavrushka.
"Please, Denisov, let me lend you some: I have some, you know," said Rostov,
blushing.
"Don't like bowwowing from my own fellows, I don't," growled Denisov.
"But if you won't accept money from me like a comrade, you will offend me.
Really I have some," Rostov repeated.
"No, I tell you."
And Denisov went to the bed to get the purse from under the pillow.
"Where have you put it, Wostov?"
"Under the lower pillow."
"It's not there."
Denisov threw both pillows on the floor. The purse was not there.
"That's a miwacle."
"Wait, haven't you dropped it?" said Rostov, picking up the pillows one at a
time and shaking them.
He pulled off the quilt and shook it. The purse was not there.
"Dear me, can I have forgotten? No, I remember thinking that you kept it
under your head like a treasure," said Rostov. "I put it just here. Where is it?"
he asked, turning to Lavrushka.
"I haven't been in the room. It must be where you put it."
"But it isn't?..."
"You're always like that; you thwow a thing down anywhere and forget it. Feel
in your pockets."
"No, if I hadn't thought of it being a treasure," said Rostov, "but I remember
putting it there."
Lavrushka turned all the bedding over, looked under the bed and under the
table, searched everywhere, and stood still in the middle of the room. Denisov
silently watched Lavrushka's movements, and when the latter threw up his
arms in surprise saying it was nowhere to be found Denisov glanced at Rostov.
"Wostov, you've not been playing schoolboy twicks..."
Rostov felt Denisov's gaze fixed on him, raised his eyes, and instantly dropped
them again. All the blood which had seemed congested somewhere below his
throat rushed to his face and eyes. He could not draw breath.
"And there hasn't been anyone in the room except the lieutenant and
yourselves. It must be here somewhere," said Lavrushka.
"Now then, you devil's puppet, look alive and hunt for it!" shouted Denisov,
suddenly, turning purple and rushing at the man with a threatening gesture. "If
the purse isn't found I'll flog you, I'll flog you all."
Rostov, his eyes avoiding Denisov, began buttoning his coat, buckled on his
saber, and put on his cap.
"I must have that purse, I tell you," shouted Denisov, shaking his orderly by
the shoulders and knocking him against the wall.
"Denisov, let him alone, I know who has taken it," said Rostov, going toward
the door without raising his eyes. Denisov paused, thought a moment, and,
evidently understanding what Rostov hinted at, seized his arm.
"Nonsense!" he cried, and the veins on his forehead and neck stood out like
cords. "You are mad, I tell you. I won't allow it. The purse is here! I'll flay this
scoundwel alive, and it will be found."
"I know who has taken it," repeated Rostov in an unsteady voice, and went to
the door.
"And I tell you, don't you dahe to do it!" shouted Denisov, rushing at the cadet
to restrain him.
But Rostov pulled away his arm and, with as much anger as though Denisov
were his worst enemy, firmly fixed his eyes directly on his face.
"Do you understand what you're saying?" he said in a trembling voice. "There
was no one else in the room except myself. So that if it is not so, then..."
He could not finish, and ran out of the room.
"Ah, may the devil take you and evewybody," were the last words Rostov
heard.
Rostov went to Telyanin's quarters.
"The master is not in, he's gone to headquarters," said Telyanin's orderly. "Has
something happened?" he added, surprised at the cadet's troubled face.
"No, nothing."
"You've only just missed him," said the orderly.
The headquarters were situated two miles away from Salzeneck, and Rostov,
without returning home, took a horse and rode there. There was an inn in the
village which the officers frequented. Rostov rode up to it and saw Telyanin's
horse at the porch.
In the second room of the inn the lieutenant was sitting over a dish of sausages
and a bottle of wine.
"Ah, you've come here too, young man!" he said, smiling and raising his
eyebrows.
"Yes," said Rostov as if it cost him a great deal to utter the word; and he sat
down at the nearest table.
Both were silent. There were two Germans and a Russian officer in the room.
No one spoke and the only sounds heard were the clatter of knives and the
munching of the lieutenant.
When Telyanin had finished his lunch he took out of his pocket a double purse
and, drawing its rings aside with his small, white, turned-up fingers, drew out
a gold imperial, and lifting his eyebrows gave it to the waiter.
"Please be quick," he said.
The coin was a new one. Rostov rose and went up to Telyanin.
"Allow me to look at your purse," he said in a low, almost inaudible, voice.
With shifting eyes but eyebrows still raised, Telyanin handed him the purse.
"Yes, it's a nice purse. Yes, yes," he said, growing suddenly pale, and added,
"Look at it, young man."
Rostov took the purse in his hand, examined it and the money in it, and looked
at Telyanin. The lieutenant was looking about in his usual way and suddenly
seemed to grow very merry.
"If we get to Vienna I'll get rid of it there but in these wretched little towns
there's nowhere to spend it," said he. "Well, let me have it, young man, I'm
going."
Rostov did not speak.
"And you? Are you going to have lunch too? They feed you quite decently
here," continued Telyanin. "Now then, let me have it."
He stretched out his hand to take hold of the purse. Rostov let go of it.
Telyanin took the purse and began carelessly slipping it into the pocket of his
riding breeches, with his eyebrows lifted and his mouth slightly open, as if to
say, "Yes, yes, I am putting my purse in my pocket and that's quite simple and
is no one else's business."
"Well, young man?" he said with a sigh, and from under his lifted brows he
glanced into Rostov's eyes.
Some flash as of an electric spark shot from Telyanin's eyes to Rostov's and
back, and back again and again in an instant.
"Come here," said Rostov, catching hold of Telyanin's arm and almost
dragging him to the window. "That money is Denisov's; you took it..." he
whispered just above Telyanin's ear.
"What? What? How dare you? What?" said Telyanin.
But these words came like a piteous, despairing cry and an entreaty for
pardon. As soon as Rostov heard them, an enormous load of doubt fell from
him. He was glad, and at the same instant began to pity the miserable man
who stood before him, but the task he had begun had to be completed.
"Heaven only knows what the people here may imagine," muttered Telyanin,
taking up his cap and moving toward a small empty room. "We must have an
explanation..."
"I know it and shall prove it," said Rostov.
"I..."
Every muscle of Telyanin's pale, terrified face began to quiver, his eyes still
shifted from side to side but with a downward look not rising to Rostov's face,
and his sobs were audible.
"Count!... Don't ruin a young fellow... here is this wretched money, take it..."
He threw it on the table. "I have an old father and mother!..."
Rostov took the money, avoiding Telyanin's eyes, and went out of the room
without a word. But at the door he stopped and then retraced his steps. "O
God," he said with tears in his eyes, "how could you do it?"
"Count..." said Telyanin drawing nearer to him.
"Don't touch me," said Rostov, drawing back. "If you need it, take the money,"
and he threw the purse to him and ran out of the inn.
CHAPTER V
That same evening there was an animated discussion among the squadron's
officers in Denisov's quarters.
"And I tell you, Rostov, that you must apologize to the colonel!" said a tall,
grizzly-haired staff captain, with enormous mustaches and many wrinkles on
his large features, to Rostov who was crimson with excitement.
The staff captain, Kirsten, had twice been reduced to the ranks for affairs of
honor and had twice regained his commission.
"I will allow no one to call me a liar!" cried Rostov. "He told me I lied, and I
told him he lied. And there it rests. He may keep me on duty every day, or may
place me under arrest, but no one can make me apologize, because if he, as
commander of this regiment, thinks it beneath his dignity to give me
satisfaction, then..."
"You just wait a moment, my dear fellow, and listen," interrupted the staff
captain in his deep bass, calmly stroking his long mustache. "You tell the
colonel in the presence of other officers that an officer has stolen..."
"I'm not to blame that the conversation began in the presence of other officers.
Perhaps I ought not to have spoken before them, but I am not a diplomatist.
That's why I joined the hussars, thinking that here one would not need finesse;
and he tells me that I am lying—so let him give me satisfaction..."
"That's all right. No one thinks you a coward, but that's not the point. Ask
Denisov whether it is not out of the question for a cadet to demand satisfaction
of his regimental commander?"
Denisov sat gloomily biting his mustache and listening to the conversation,
evidently with no wish to take part in it. He answered the staff captain's
question by a disapproving shake of his head.
"You speak to the colonel about this nasty business before other officers,"
continued the staff captain, "and Bogdanich" (the colonel was called
Bogdanich) "shuts you up."
"He did not shut me up, he said I was telling an untruth."
"Well, have it so, and you talked a lot of nonsense to him and must apologize."
"Not on any account!" exclaimed Rostov.
"I did not expect this of you," said the staff captain seriously and severely.
"You don't wish to apologize, but, man, it's not only to him but to the whole
regiment—all of us—you're to blame all round. The case is this: you ought to
have thought the matter over and taken advice; but no, you go and blurt it all
straight out before the officers. Now what was the colonel to do? Have the
officer tried and disgrace the whole regiment? Disgrace the whole regiment
because of one scoundrel? Is that how you look at it? We don't see it like that.
And Bogdanich was a brick: he told you you were saying what was not true.
It's not pleasant, but what's to be done, my dear fellow? You landed yourself in
it. And now, when one wants to smooth the thing over, some conceit prevents
your apologizing, and you wish to make the whole affair public. You are
offended at being put on duty a bit, but why not apologize to an old and
honorable officer? Whatever Bogdanich may be, anyway he is an honorable
and brave old colonel! You're quick at taking offense, but you don't mind
disgracing the whole regiment!" The staff captain's voice began to tremble.
"You have been in the regiment next to no time, my lad, you're here today and
tomorrow you'll be appointed adjutant somewhere and can snap your fingers
when it is said 'There are thieves among the Pavlograd officers!' But it's not all
the same to us! Am I not right, Denisov? It's not the same!"
Denisov remained silent and did not move, but occasionally looked with his
glittering black eyes at Rostov.
"You value your own pride and don't wish to apologize," continued the staff
captain, "but we old fellows, who have grown up in and, God willing, are
going to die in the regiment, we prize the honor of the regiment, and
Bogdanich knows it. Oh, we do prize it, old fellow! And all this is not right,
it's not right! You may take offense or not but I always stick to mother truth.
It's not right!"
And the staff captain rose and turned away from Rostov.
"That's twue, devil take it!" shouted Denisov, jumping up. "Now then,
Wostov, now then!"
Rostov, growing red and pale alternately, looked first at one
officer and then at the other.
"No, gentlemen, no... you mustn't think... I quite understand. You're wrong to
think that of me... I... for me... for the honor of the regiment I'd... Ah well, I'll
show that in action, and for me the honor of the flag... Well, never mind, it's
true I'm to blame, to blame all round. Well, what else do you want?..."
"Come, that's right, Count!" cried the staff captain, turning round and clapping
Rostov on the shoulder with his big hand.
"I tell you," shouted Denisov, "he's a fine fellow."
"That's better, Count," said the staff captain, beginning to address Rostov by
his title, as if in recognition of his confession. "Go and apologize, your
excellency. Yes, go!"
"Gentlemen, I'll do anything. No one shall hear a word from me," said Rostov
in an imploring voice, "but I can't apologize, by God I can't, do what you will!
How can I go and apologize like a little boy asking forgiveness?"
Denisov began to laugh.
"It'll be worse for you. Bogdanich is vindictive and you'll pay for your
obstinacy," said Kirsten.
"No, on my word it's not obstinacy! I can't describe the feeling. I can't..."
"Well, it's as you like," said the staff captain. "And what has become of that
scoundrel?" he asked Denisov.
"He has weported himself sick, he's to be stwuck off the list tomowwow,"
muttered Denisov.
"It is an illness, there's no other way of explaining it," said the staff captain.
"Illness or not, he'd better not cwoss my path. I'd kill him!" shouted Denisov
in a bloodthirsty tone.
Just then Zherkov entered the room.
"What brings you here?" cried the officers turning to the newcomer.
"We're to go into action, gentlemen! Mack has surrendered with his whole
army."
"It's not true!"
"I've seen him myself!"
"What? Saw the real Mack? With hands and feet?"
"Into action! Into action! Bring him a bottle for such news! But how did you
come here?"
"I've been sent back to the regiment all on account of that devil, Mack. An
Austrian general complained of me. I congratulated him on Mack's arrival...
What's the matter, Rostov? You look as if you'd just come out of a hot bath."
"Oh, my dear fellow, we're in such a stew here these last two days."
The regimental adjutant came in and confirmed the news brought by Zherkov.
They were under orders to advance next day.
"We're going into action, gentlemen!"
"Well, thank God! We've been sitting here too long!"
CHAPTER VI
Kutuzov fell back toward Vienna, destroying behind him the bridges over the
rivers Inn (at Braunau) and Traun (near Linz). On October 23 the Russian
troops were crossing the river Enns. At midday the Russian baggage train, the
artillery, and columns of troops were defiling through the town of Enns on
both sides of the bridge.
It was a warm, rainy, autumnal day. The wide expanse that opened out before
the heights on which the Russian batteries stood guarding the bridge was at
times veiled by a diaphanous curtain of slanting rain, and then, suddenly
spread out in the sunlight, far-distant objects could be clearly seen glittering as
though freshly varnished. Down below, the little town could be seen with its
white, red-roofed houses, its cathedral, and its bridge, on both sides of which
streamed jostling masses of Russian troops. At the bend of the Danube,
vessels, an island, and a castle with a park surrounded by the waters of the
confluence of the Enns and the Danube became visible, and the rocky left
bank of the Danube covered with pine forests, with a mystic background of
green treetops and bluish gorges. The turrets of a convent stood out beyond a
wild virgin pine forest, and far away on the other side of the Enns the enemy's
horse patrols could be discerned.
Among the field guns on the brow of the hill the general in command of the
rearguard stood with a staff officer, scanning the country through his
fieldglass. A little behind them Nesvitski, who had been sent to the rearguard
by the commander-in-chief, was sitting on the trail of a gun carriage. A
Cossack who accompanied him had handed him a knapsack and a flask, and
Nesvitski was treating some officers to pies and real doppelkummel. The
officers gladly gathered round him, some on their knees, some squatting
Turkish fashion on the wet grass.
"Yes, the Austrian prince who built that castle was no fool. It's a fine place!
Why are you not eating anything, gentlemen?" Nesvitski was saying.
"Thank you very much, Prince," answered one of the officers, pleased to be
talking to a staff officer of such importance. "It's a lovely place! We passed
close to the park and saw two deer... and what a splendid house!"
"Look, Prince," said another, who would have dearly liked to take another pie
but felt shy, and therefore pretended to be examining the countryside—"See,
our infantrymen have already got there. Look there in the meadow behind the
village, three of them are dragging something. They'll ransack that castle," he
remarked with evident approval.
"So they will," said Nesvitski. "No, but what I should like," added he,
munching a pie in his moist-lipped handsome mouth, "would be to slip in over
there."
He pointed with a smile to a turreted nunnery, and his eyes narrowed and
gleamed.
"That would be fine, gentlemen!"
The officers laughed.
"Just to flutter the nuns a bit. They say there are Italian girls among them. On
my word I'd give five years of my life for it!"
"They must be feeling dull, too," said one of the bolder officers, laughing.
Meanwhile the staff officer standing in front pointed out something to the
general, who looked through his field glass.
"Yes, so it is, so it is," said the general angrily, lowering the field glass and
shrugging his shoulders, "so it is! They'll be fired on at the crossing. And why
are they dawdling there?"
On the opposite side the enemy could be seen by the naked eye, and from their
battery a milk-white cloud arose. Then came the distant report of a shot, and
our troops could be seen hurrying to the crossing.
Nesvitski rose, puffing, and went up to the general, smiling.
"Would not your excellency like a little refreshment?" he said.
"It's a bad business," said the general without answering him, "our men have
been wasting time."
"Hadn't I better ride over, your excellency?" asked Nesvitski.
"Yes, please do," answered the general, and he repeated the order that had
already once been given in detail: "and tell the hussars that they are to cross
last and to fire the bridge as I ordered; and the inflammable material on the
bridge must be reinspected."
"Very good," answered Nesvitski.
He called the Cossack with his horse, told him to put away the knapsack and
flask, and swung his heavy person easily into the saddle.
"I'll really call in on the nuns," he said to the officers who watched him
smilingly, and he rode off by the winding path down the hill.
"Now then, let's see how far it will carry, Captain. Just try!" said the general,
turning to an artillery officer. "Have a little fun to pass the time."
"Crew, to your guns!" commanded the officer.
In a moment the men came running gaily from their campfires and began
loading.
"One!" came the command.
Number one jumped briskly aside. The gun rang out with a deafening metallic
roar, and a whistling grenade flew above the heads of our troops below the hill
and fell far short of the enemy, a little smoke showing the spot where it burst.
The faces of officers and men brightened up at the sound. Everyone got up and
began watching the movements of our troops below, as plainly visible as if but
a stone's throw away, and the movements of the approaching enemy farther
off. At the same instant the sun came fully out from behind the clouds, and the
clear sound of the solitary shot and the brilliance of the bright sunshine
merged in a single joyous and spirited impression.
CHAPTER VII
Two of the enemy's shots had already flown across the bridge, where there was
a crush. Halfway across stood Prince Nesvitski, who had alighted from his
horse and whose big body was jammed against the railings. He looked back
laughing to the Cossack who stood a few steps behind him holding two horses
by their bridles. Each time Prince Nesvitski tried to move on, soldiers and
carts pushed him back again and pressed him against the railings, and all he
could do was to smile.
"What a fine fellow you are, friend!" said the Cossack to a convoy soldier with
a wagon, who was pressing onto the infantrymen who were crowded together
close to his wheels and his horses. "What a fellow! You can't wait a moment!
Don't you see the general wants to pass?"
But the convoyman took no notice of the word "general" and shouted at the
soldiers who were blocking his way. "Hi there, boys! Keep to the left! Wait a
bit." But the soldiers, crowded together shoulder to shoulder, their bayonets
interlocking, moved over the bridge in a dense mass. Looking down over the
rails Prince Nesvitski saw the rapid, noisy little waves of the Enns, which
rippling and eddying round the piles of the bridge chased each other along.
Looking on the bridge he saw equally uniform living waves of soldiers,
shoulder straps, covered shakos, knapsacks, bayonets, long muskets, and,
under the shakos, faces with broad cheekbones, sunken cheeks, and listless
tired expressions, and feet that moved through the sticky mud that covered the
planks of the bridge. Sometimes through the monotonous waves of men, like a
fleck of white foam on the waves of the Enns, an officer, in a cloak and with a
type of face different from that of the men, squeezed his way along;
sometimes like a chip of wood whirling in the river, an hussar on foot, an
orderly, or a townsman was carried through the waves of infantry; and
sometimes like a log floating down the river, an officers' or company's
baggage wagon, piled high, leather covered, and hemmed in on all sides,
moved across the bridge.
"It's as if a dam had burst," said the Cossack hopelessly. "Are there many more
of you to come?"
"A million all but one!" replied a waggish soldier in a torn coat, with a wink,
and passed on followed by another, an old man.
"If he" (he meant the enemy) "begins popping at the bridge now," said the old
soldier dismally to a comrade, "you'll forget to scratch yourself."
That soldier passed on, and after him came another sitting on a cart.
"Where the devil have the leg bands been shoved to?" said an orderly, running
behind the cart and fumbling in the back of it.
And he also passed on with the wagon. Then came some merry soldiers who
had evidently been drinking.
"And then, old fellow, he gives him one in the teeth with the butt end of his
gun..." a soldier whose greatcoat was well tucked up said gaily, with a wide
swing of his arm.
"Yes, the ham was just delicious..." answered another with a loud laugh. And
they, too, passed on, so that Nesvitski did not learn who had been struck on the
teeth, or what the ham had to do with it.
"Bah! How they scurry. He just sends a ball and they think they'll all be
killed," a sergeant was saying angrily and reproachfully.
"As it flies past me, Daddy, the ball I mean," said a young soldier with an
enormous mouth, hardly refraining from laughing, "I felt like dying of fright. I
did, 'pon my word, I got that frightened!" said he, as if bragging of having
been frightened.
That one also passed. Then followed a cart unlike any that had gone before. It
was a German cart with a pair of horses led by a German, and seemed loaded
with a whole houseful of effects. A fine brindled cow with a large udder was
attached to the cart behind. A woman with an unweaned baby, an old woman,
and a healthy German girl with bright red cheeks were sitting on some feather
beds. Evidently these fugitives were allowed to pass by special permission.
The eyes of all the soldiers turned toward the women, and while the vehicle
was passing at foot pace all the soldiers' remarks related to the two young
ones. Every face bore almost the same smile, expressing unseemly thoughts
about the women.
"Just see, the German sausage is making tracks, too!"
"Sell me the missis," said another soldier, addressing the German, who, angry
and frightened, strode energetically along with downcast eyes.
"See how smart she's made herself! Oh, the devils!"
"There, Fedotov, you should be quartered on them!"
"I have seen as much before now, mate!"
"Where are you going?" asked an infantry officer who was eating an apple,
also half smiling as he looked at the handsome girl.
The German closed his eyes, signifying that he did not understand.
"Take it if you like," said the officer, giving the girl an apple.
The girl smiled and took it. Nesvitski like the rest of the men on the bridge did
not take his eyes off the women till they had passed. When they had gone by,
the same stream of soldiers followed, with the same kind of talk, and at last all
stopped. As often happens, the horses of a convoy wagon became restive at
the end of the bridge, and the whole crowd had to wait.
"And why are they stopping? There's no proper order!" said the soldiers.
"Where are you shoving to? Devil take you! Can't you wait? It'll be worse if
he fires the bridge. See, here's an officer jammed in too"—different voices
were saying in the crowd, as the men looked at one another, and all pressed
toward the exit from the bridge.
Looking down at the waters of the Enns under the bridge, Nesvitski suddenly
heard a sound new to him, of something swiftly approaching... something big,
that splashed into the water.
"Just see where it carries to!" a soldier near by said sternly, looking round at
the sound.
"Encouraging us to get along quicker," said another uneasily.
The crowd moved on again. Nesvitski realized that it was a cannon ball.
"Hey, Cossack, my horse!" he said. "Now, then, you there! get out of the way!
Make way!"
With great difficulty he managed to get to his horse, and shouting continually
he moved on. The soldiers squeezed themselves to make way for him, but
again pressed on him so that they jammed his leg, and those nearest him were
not to blame for they were themselves pressed still harder from behind.
"Nesvitski, Nesvitski! you numskull!" came a hoarse voice from behind him.
Nesvitski looked round and saw, some fifteen paces away but separated by the
living mass of moving infantry, Vaska Denisov, red and shaggy, with his cap
on the back of his black head and a cloak hanging jauntily over his shoulder.
"Tell these devils, these fiends, to let me pass!" shouted Denisov evidently in a
fit of rage, his coal-black eyes with their bloodshot whites glittering and
rolling as he waved his sheathed saber in a small bare hand as red as his face.
"Ah, Vaska!" joyfully replied Nesvitski. "What's up with you?"
"The squadwon can't pass," shouted Vaska Denisov, showing his white teeth
fiercely and spurring his black thoroughbred Arab, which twitched its ears as
the bayonets touched it, and snorted, spurting white foam from his bit,
tramping the planks of the bridge with his hoofs, and apparently ready to jump
over the railings had his rider let him. "What is this? They're like sheep! Just
like sheep! Out of the way!... Let us pass!... Stop there, you devil with the cart!
I'll hack you with my saber!" he shouted, actually drawing his saber from its
scabbard and flourishing it.
The soldiers crowded against one another with terrified faces, and Denisov
joined Nesvitski.
"How's it you're not drunk today?" said Nesvitski when the other had ridden
up to him.
"They don't even give one time to dwink!" answered Vaska Denisov. "They
keep dwagging the wegiment to and fwo all day. If they mean to fight, let's
fight. But the devil knows what this is."
"What a dandy you are today!" said Nesvitski, looking at Denisov's new cloak
and saddlecloth.
Denisov smiled, took out of his sabretache a handkerchief that diffused a smell
of perfume, and put it to Nesvitski's nose.
"Of course. I'm going into action! I've shaved, bwushed my teeth, and scented
myself."
The imposing figure of Nesvitski followed by his Cossack, and the
determination of Denisov who flourished his sword and shouted frantically,
had such an effect that they managed to squeeze through to the farther side of
the bridge and stopped the infantry. Beside the bridge Nesvitski found the
colonel to whom he had to deliver the order, and having done this he rode
back.
Having cleared the way Denisov stopped at the end of the bridge. Carelessly
holding in his stallion that was neighing and pawing the ground, eager to
rejoin its fellows, he watched his squadron draw nearer. Then the clang of
hoofs, as of several horses galloping, resounded on the planks of the bridge,
and the squadron, officers in front and men four abreast, spread across the
bridge and began to emerge on his side of it.
The infantry who had been stopped crowded near the bridge in the trampled
mud and gazed with that particular feeling of ill-will, estrangement, and
ridicule with which troops of different arms usually encounter one another at
the clean, smart hussars who moved past them in regular order.
"Smart lads! Only fit for a fair!" said one.
"What good are they? They're led about just for show!" remarked another.
"Don't kick up the dust, you infantry!" jested an hussar whose prancing horse
had splashed mud over some foot soldiers.
"I'd like to put you on a two days' march with a knapsack! Your fine cords
would soon get a bit rubbed," said an infantryman, wiping the mud off his face
with his sleeve. "Perched up there, you're more like a bird than a man."
"There now, Zikin, they ought to put you on a horse. You'd look fine," said a
corporal, chaffing a thin little soldier who bent under the weight of his
knapsack.
"Take a stick between your legs, that'll suit you for a horse!" the hussar
shouted back.
CHAPTER VIII
The last of the infantry hurriedly crossed the bridge, squeezing together as
they approached it as if passing through a funnel. At last the baggage wagons
had all crossed, the crush was less, and the last battalion came onto the bridge.
Only Denisov's squadron of hussars remained on the farther side of the bridge
facing the enemy, who could be seen from the hill on the opposite bank but
was not yet visible from the bridge, for the horizon as seen from the valley
through which the river flowed was formed by the rising ground only half a
mile away. At the foot of the hill lay wasteland over which a few groups of our
Cossack scouts were moving. Suddenly on the road at the top of the high
ground, artillery and troops in blue uniform were seen. These were the French.
A group of Cossack scouts retired down the hill at a trot. All the officers and
men of Denisov's squadron, though they tried to talk of other things and to
look in other directions, thought only of what was there on the hilltop, and
kept constantly looking at the patches appearing on the skyline, which they
knew to be the enemy's troops. The weather had cleared again since noon and
the sun was descending brightly upon the Danube and the dark hills around it.
It was calm, and at intervals the bugle calls and the shouts of the enemy could
be heard from the hill. There was no one now between the squadron and the
enemy except a few scattered skirmishers. An empty space of some seven
hundred yards was all that separated them. The enemy ceased firing, and that
stern, threatening, inaccessible, and intangible line which separates two hostile
armies was all the more clearly felt.
"One step beyond that boundary line which resembles the line dividing the
living from the dead lies uncertainty, suffering, and death. And what is there?
Who is there?—there beyond that field, that tree, that roof lit up by the sun?
No one knows, but one wants to know. You fear and yet long to cross that line,
and know that sooner or later it must be crossed and you will have to find out
what is there, just as you will inevitably have to learn what lies the other side
of death. But you are strong, healthy, cheerful, and excited, and are surrounded
by other such excitedly animated and healthy men." So thinks, or at any rate
feels, anyone who comes in sight of the enemy, and that feeling gives a
particular glamour and glad keenness of impression to everything that takes
place at such moments.
On the high ground where the enemy was, the smoke of a cannon rose, and a
ball flew whistling over the heads of the hussar squadron. The officers who
had been standing together rode off to their places. The hussars began
carefully aligning their horses. Silence fell on the whole squadron. All were
looking at the enemy in front and at the squadron commander, awaiting the
word of command. A second and a third cannon ball flew past. Evidently they
were firing at the hussars, but the balls with rapid rhythmic whistle flew over
the heads of the horsemen and fell somewhere beyond them. The hussars did
not look round, but at the sound of each shot, as at the word of command, the
whole squadron with its rows of faces so alike yet so different, holding its
breath while the ball flew past, rose in the stirrups and sank back again. The
soldiers without turning their heads glanced at one another, curious to see their
comrades' impression. Every face, from Denisov's to that of the bugler,
showed one common expression of conflict, irritation, and excitement, around
chin and mouth. The quartermaster frowned, looking at the soldiers as if
threatening to punish them. Cadet Mironov ducked every time a ball flew past.
Rostov on the left flank, mounted on his Rook—a handsome horse despite its
game leg—had the happy air of a schoolboy called up before a large audience
for an examination in which he feels sure he will distinguish himself. He was
glancing at everyone with a clear, bright expression, as if asking them to
notice how calmly he sat under fire. But despite himself, on his face too that
same indication of something new and stern showed round the mouth.
"Who's that curtseying there? Cadet Miwonov! That's not wight! Look at me,"
cried Denisov who, unable to keep still on one spot, kept turning his horse in
front of the squadron.
The black, hairy, snub-nosed face of Vaska Denisov, and his whole short
sturdy figure with the sinewy hairy hand and stumpy fingers in which he held
the hilt of his naked saber, looked just as it usually did, especially toward
evening when he had emptied his second bottle; he was only redder than usual.
With his shaggy head thrown back like birds when they drink, pressing his
spurs mercilessly into the sides of his good horse, Bedouin, and sitting as
though falling backwards in the saddle, he galloped to the other flank of the
squadron and shouted in a hoarse voice to the men to look to their pistols. He
rode up to Kirsten. The staff captain on his broad-backed, steady mare came at
a walk to meet him. His face with its long mustache was serious as always,
only his eyes were brighter than usual.
"Well, what about it?" said he to Denisov. "It won't come to a fight. You'll see
—we shall retire."
"The devil only knows what they're about!" muttered Denisov. "Ah, Wostov,"
he cried noticing the cadet's bright face, "you've got it at last."
And he smiled approvingly, evidently pleased with the cadet. Rostov felt
perfectly happy. Just then the commander appeared on the bridge. Denisov
galloped up to him.
"Your excellency! Let us attack them! I'll dwive them off."
"Attack indeed!" said the colonel in a bored voice, puckering up his face as if
driving off a troublesome fly. "And why are you stopping here? Don't you see
the skirmishers are retreating? Lead the squadron back."
The squadron crossed the bridge and drew out of range of fire without having
lost a single man. The second squadron that had been in the front line followed
them across and the last Cossacks quitted the farther side of the river.
The two Pavlograd squadrons, having crossed the bridge, retired up the hill
one after the other. Their colonel, Karl Bogdanich Schubert, came up to
Denisov's squadron and rode at a footpace not far from Rostov, without taking
any notice of him although they were now meeting for the first time since their
encounter concerning Telyanin. Rostov, feeling that he was at the front and in
the power of a man toward whom he now admitted that he had been to blame,
did not lift his eyes from the colonel's athletic back, his nape covered with
light hair, and his red neck. It seemed to Rostov that Bogdanich was only
pretending not to notice him, and that his whole aim now was to test the
cadet's courage, so he drew himself up and looked around him merrily; then it
seemed to him that Bogdanich rode so near in order to show him his courage.
Next he thought that his enemy would send the squadron on a desperate attack
just to punish him—Rostov. Then he imagined how, after the attack,
Bogdanich would come up to him as he lay wounded and would
magnanimously extend the hand of reconciliation.
The high-shouldered figure of Zherkov, familiar to the Pavlograds as he had
but recently left their regiment, rode up to the colonel. After his dismissal
from headquarters Zherkov had not remained in the regiment, saying he was
not such a fool as to slave at the front when he could get more rewards by
doing nothing on the staff, and had succeeded in attaching himself as an
orderly officer to Prince Bagration. He now came to his former chief with an
order from the commander of the rear guard.
"Colonel," he said, addressing Rostov's enemy with an air of gloomy gravity
and glancing round at his comrades, "there is an order to stop and fire the
bridge."
"An order to who?" asked the colonel morosely.
"I don't myself know 'to who,'" replied the cornet in a serious tone, "but the
prince told me to 'go and tell the colonel that the hussars must return quickly
and fire the bridge.'"
Zherkov was followed by an officer of the suite who rode up to the colonel of
hussars with the same order. After him the stout Nesvitski came galloping up
on a Cossack horse that could scarcely carry his weight.
"How's this, Colonel?" he shouted as he approached. "I told you to fire the
bridge, and now someone has gone and blundered; they are all beside
themselves over there and one can't make anything out."
The colonel deliberately stopped the regiment and turned to Nesvitski.
"You spoke to me of inflammable material," said he, "but you said nothing
about firing it."
"But, my dear sir," said Nesvitski as he drew up, taking off his cap and
smoothing his hair wet with perspiration with his plump hand, "wasn't I telling
you to fire the bridge, when inflammable material had been put in position?"
"I am not your 'dear sir,' Mr. Staff Officer, and you did not tell me to burn the
bridge! I know the service, and it is my habit orders strictly to obey. You said
the bridge would be burned, but who would it burn, I could not know by the
holy spirit!"
"Ah, that's always the way!" said Nesvitski with a wave of the hand. "How did
you get here?" said he, turning to Zherkov.
"On the same business. But you are damp! Let me wring you out!"
"You were saying, Mr. Staff Officer..." continued the colonel in an offended
tone.
"Colonel," interrupted the officer of the suite, "You must be quick or the
enemy will bring up his guns to use grapeshot."
The colonel looked silently at the officer of the suite, at the stout staff officer,
and at Zherkov, and he frowned.
"I will the bridge fire," he said in a solemn tone as if to announce that in spite
of all the unpleasantness he had to endure he would still do the right thing.
Striking his horse with his long muscular legs as if it were to blame for
everything, the colonel moved forward and ordered the second squadron, that
in which Rostov was serving under Denisov, to return to the bridge.
"There, it's just as I thought," said Rostov to himself. "He wishes to test me!"
His heart contracted and the blood rushed to his face. "Let him see whether I
am a coward!" he thought.
Again on all the bright faces of the squadron the serious expression appeared
that they had worn when under fire. Rostov watched his enemy, the colonel,
closely—to find in his face confirmation of his own conjecture, but the colonel
did not once glance at Rostov, and looked as he always did when at the front,
solemn and stern. Then came the word of command.
"Look sharp! Look sharp!" several voices repeated around him.
Their sabers catching in the bridles and their spurs jingling, the hussars hastily
dismounted, not knowing what they were to do. The men were crossing
themselves. Rostov no longer looked at the colonel, he had no time. He was
afraid of falling behind the hussars, so much afraid that his heart stood still.
His hand trembled as he gave his horse into an orderly's charge, and he felt the
blood rush to his heart with a thud. Denisov rode past him, leaning back and
shouting something. Rostov saw nothing but the hussars running all around
him, their spurs catching and their sabers clattering.
"Stretchers!" shouted someone behind him.
Rostov did not think what this call for stretchers meant; he ran on, trying only
to be ahead of the others; but just at the bridge, not looking at the ground, he
came on some sticky, trodden mud, stumbled, and fell on his hands. The others
outstripped him.
"At boss zides, Captain," he heard the voice of the colonel, who, having ridden
ahead, had pulled up his horse near the bridge, with a triumphant, cheerful
face.
Rostov wiping his muddy hands on his breeches looked at his enemy and was
about to run on, thinking that the farther he went to the front the better. But
Bogdanich, without looking at or recognizing Rostov, shouted to him:
"Who's that running on the middle of the bridge? To the right! Come back,
Cadet!" he cried angrily; and turning to Denisov, who, showing off his
courage, had ridden on to the planks of the bridge:
"Why run risks, Captain? You should dismount," he said.
"Oh, every bullet has its billet," answered Vaska Denisov, turning in his
saddle.
Meanwhile Nesvitski, Zherkov, and the officer of the suite were standing
together out of range of the shots, watching, now the small group of men with
yellow shakos, dark-green jackets braided with cord, and blue riding breeches,
who were swarming near the bridge, and then at what was approaching in the
distance from the opposite side—the blue uniforms and groups with horses,
easily recognizable as artillery.
"Will they burn the bridge or not? Who'll get there first? Will they get there
and fire the bridge or will the French get within grapeshot range and wipe
them out?" These were the questions each man of the troops on the high
ground above the bridge involuntarily asked himself with a sinking heart—
watching the bridge and the hussars in the bright evening light and the blue
tunics advancing from the other side with their bayonets and guns.
"Ugh. The hussars will get it hot!" said Nesvitski; "they are within grapeshot
range now."
"He shouldn't have taken so many men," said the officer of the suite.
"True enough," answered Nesvitski; "two smart fellows could have done the
job just as well."
"Ah, your excellency," put in Zherkov, his eyes fixed on the hussars, but still
with that naive air that made it impossible to know whether he was speaking in
jest or in earnest. "Ah, your excellency! How you look at things! Send two
men? And who then would give us the Vladimir medal and ribbon? But now,
even if they do get peppered, the squadron may be recommended for honors
and he may get a ribbon. Our Bogdanich knows how things are done."
"There now!" said the officer of the suite, "that's grapeshot."
He pointed to the French guns, the limbers of which were being detached and
hurriedly removed.
On the French side, amid the groups with cannon, a cloud of smoke appeared,
then a second and a third almost simultaneously, and at the moment when the
first report was heard a fourth was seen. Then two reports one after another,
and a third.
"Oh! Oh!" groaned Nesvitski as if in fierce pain, seizing the officer of the suite
by the arm. "Look! A man has fallen! Fallen, fallen!"
"Two, I think."
"If I were Tsar I would never go to war," said Nesvitski, turning away.
The French guns were hastily reloaded. The infantry in their blue uniforms
advanced toward the bridge at a run. Smoke appeared again but at irregular
intervals, and grapeshot cracked and rattled onto the bridge. But this time
Nesvitski could not see what was happening there, as a dense cloud of smoke
arose from it. The hussars had succeeded in setting it on fire and the French
batteries were now firing at them, no longer to hinder them but because the
guns were trained and there was someone to fire at.
The French had time to fire three rounds of grapeshot before the hussars got
back to their horses. Two were misdirected and the shot went too high, but the
last round fell in the midst of a group of hussars and knocked three of them
over.
Rostov, absorbed by his relations with Bogdanich, had paused on the bridge
not knowing what to do. There was no one to hew down (as he had always
imagined battles to himself), nor could he help to fire the bridge because he
had not brought any burning straw with him like the other soldiers. He stood
looking about him, when suddenly he heard a rattle on the bridge as if nuts
were being spilt, and the hussar nearest to him fell against the rails with a
groan. Rostov ran up to him with the others. Again someone shouted,
"Stretchers!" Four men seized the hussar and began lifting him.
"Oooh! For Christ's sake let me alone!" cried the wounded man, but still he
was lifted and laid on the stretcher.
Nicholas Rostov turned away and, as if searching for something, gazed into
the distance, at the waters of the Danube, at the sky, and at the sun. How
beautiful the sky looked; how blue, how calm, and how deep! How bright and
glorious was the setting sun! With what soft glitter the waters of the distant
Danube shone. And fairer still were the faraway blue mountains beyond the
river, the nunnery, the mysterious gorges, and the pine forests veiled in the
mist of their summits... There was peace and happiness... "I should wish for
nothing else, nothing, if only I were there," thought Rostov. "In myself alone
and in that sunshine there is so much happiness; but here... groans, suffering,
fear, and this uncertainty and hurry... There—they are shouting again, and
again are all running back somewhere, and I shall run with them, and it, death,
is here above me and around... Another instant and I shall never again see the
sun, this water, that gorge!..."
At that instant the sun began to hide behind the clouds, and other stretchers
came into view before Rostov. And the fear of death and of the stretchers, and
love of the sun and of life, all merged into one feeling of sickening agitation.
"O Lord God! Thou who art in that heaven, save, forgive, and protect me!"
Rostov whispered.
The hussars ran back to the men who held their horses; their voices sounded
louder and calmer, the stretchers disappeared from sight.
"Well, fwiend? So you've smelt powdah!" shouted Vaska Denisov just above
his ear.
"It's all over; but I am a coward—yes, a coward!" thought Rostov, and sighing
deeply he took Rook, his horse, which stood resting one foot, from the orderly
and began to mount.
"Was that grapeshot?" he asked Denisov.
"Yes and no mistake!" cried Denisov. "You worked like wegular bwicks and
it's nasty work! An attack's pleasant work! Hacking away at the dogs! But this
sort of thing is the very devil, with them shooting at you like a target."
And Denisov rode up to a group that had stopped near Rostov, composed of
the colonel, Nesvitski, Zherkov, and the officer from the suite.
"Well, it seems that no one has noticed," thought Rostov. And this was true.
No one had taken any notice, for everyone knew the sensation which the cadet
under fire for the first time had experienced.
"Here's something for you to report," said Zherkov. "See if I don't get
promoted to a sublieutenancy."
"Inform the prince that I the bridge fired!" said the colonel triumphantly and
gaily.
"And if he asks about the losses?"
"A trifle," said the colonel in his bass voice: "two hussars wounded, and one
knocked out," he added, unable to restrain a happy smile, and pronouncing the
phrase "knocked out" with ringing distinctness.
CHAPTER IX
Pursued by the French army of a hundred thousand men under the command
of Bonaparte, encountering a population that was unfriendly to it, losing
confidence in its allies, suffering from shortness of supplies, and compelled to
act under conditions of war unlike anything that had been foreseen, the
Russian army of thirty-five thousand men commanded by Kutuzov was
hurriedly retreating along the Danube, stopping where overtaken by the enemy
and fighting rearguard actions only as far as necessary to enable it to retreat
without losing its heavy equipment. There had been actions at Lambach,
Amstetten, and Melk; but despite the courage and endurance—acknowledged
even by the enemy—with which the Russians fought, the only consequence of
these actions was a yet more rapid retreat. Austrian troops that had escaped
capture at Ulm and had joined Kutuzov at Braunau now separated from the
Russian army, and Kutuzov was left with only his own weak and exhausted
forces. The defense of Vienna was no longer to be thought of. Instead of an
offensive, the plan of which, carefully prepared in accord with the modern
science of strategics, had been handed to Kutuzov when he was in Vienna by
the Austrian Hofkriegsrath, the sole and almost unattainable aim remaining for
him was to effect a junction with the forces that were advancing from Russia,
without losing his army as Mack had done at Ulm.
On the twenty-eighth of October Kutuzov with his army crossed to the left
bank of the Danube and took up a position for the first time with the river
between himself and the main body of the French. On the thirtieth he attacked
Mortier's division, which was on the left bank, and broke it up. In this action
for the first time trophies were taken: banners, cannon, and two enemy
generals. For the first time, after a fortnight's retreat, the Russian troops had
halted and after a fight had not only held the field but had repulsed the French.
Though the troops were ill-clad, exhausted, and had lost a third of their
number in killed, wounded, sick, and stragglers; though a number of sick and
wounded had been abandoned on the other side of the Danube with a letter in
which Kutuzov entrusted them to the humanity of the enemy; and though the
big hospitals and the houses in Krems converted into military hospitals could
no longer accommodate all the sick and wounded, yet the stand made at
Krems and the victory over Mortier raised the spirits of the army considerably.
Throughout the whole army and at headquarters most joyful though erroneous
rumors were rife of the imaginary approach of columns from Russia, of some
victory gained by the Austrians, and of the retreat of the frightened Bonaparte.
Prince Andrew during the battle had been in attendance on the Austrian
General Schmidt, who was killed in the action. His horse had been wounded
under him and his own arm slightly grazed by a bullet. As a mark of the
commander-in-chief's special favor he was sent with the news of this victory
to the Austrian court, now no longer at Vienna (which was threatened by the
French) but at Brunn. Despite his apparently delicate build Prince Andrew
could endure physical fatigue far better than many very muscular men, and on
the night of the battle, having arrived at Krems excited but not weary, with
dispatches from Dokhturov to Kutuzov, he was sent immediately with a
special dispatch to Brunn. To be so sent meant not only a reward but an
important step toward promotion.
The night was dark but starry, the road showed black in the snow that had
fallen the previous day—the day of the battle. Reviewing his impressions of
the recent battle, picturing pleasantly to himself the impression his news of a
victory would create, or recalling the send-off given him by the commanderin-chief and his fellow officers, Prince Andrew was galloping along in a post
chaise enjoying the feelings of a man who has at length begun to attain a longdesired happiness. As soon as he closed his eyes his ears seemed filled with
the rattle of the wheels and the sensation of victory. Then he began to imagine
that the Russians were running away and that he himself was killed, but he
quickly roused himself with a feeling of joy, as if learning afresh that this was
not so but that on the contrary the French had run away. He again recalled all
the details of the victory and his own calm courage during the battle, and
feeling reassured he dozed off.... The dark starry night was followed by a
bright cheerful morning. The snow was thawing in the sunshine, the horses
galloped quickly, and on both sides of the road were forests of different kinds,
fields, and villages.
At one of the post stations he overtook a convoy of Russian wounded. The
Russian officer in charge of the transport lolled back in the front cart, shouting
and scolding a soldier with coarse abuse. In each of the long German carts six
or more pale, dirty, bandaged men were being jolted over the stony road. Some
of them were talking (he heard Russian words), others were eating bread; the
more severely wounded looked silently, with the languid interest of sick
children, at the envoy hurrying past them.
Prince Andrew told his driver to stop, and asked a soldier in what action they
had been wounded. "Day before yesterday, on the Danube," answered the
soldier. Prince Andrew took out his purse and gave the soldier three gold
pieces.
"That's for them all," he said to the officer who came up.
"Get well soon, lads!" he continued, turning to the soldiers. "There's plenty to
do still."
"What news, sir?" asked the officer, evidently anxious to start a conversation.
"Good news!... Go on!" he shouted to the driver, and they galloped on.
It was already quite dark when Prince Andrew rattled over the paved streets of
Brunn and found himself surrounded by high buildings, the lights of shops,
houses, and street lamps, fine carriages, and all that atmosphere of a large and
active town which is always so attractive to a soldier after camp life. Despite
his rapid journey and sleepless night, Prince Andrew when he drove up to the
palace felt even more vigorous and alert than he had done the day before. Only
his eyes gleamed feverishly and his thoughts followed one another with
extraordinary clearness and rapidity. He again vividly recalled the details of
the battle, no longer dim, but definite and in the concise form in which he
imagined himself stating them to the Emperor Francis. He vividly imagined
the casual questions that might be put to him and the answers he would give.
He expected to be at once presented to the Emperor. At the chief entrance to
the palace, however, an official came running out to meet him, and learning
that he was a special messenger led him to another entrance.
"To the right from the corridor, Euer Hochgeboren! There you will find the
adjutant on duty," said the official. "He will conduct you to the Minister of
War."
The adjutant on duty, meeting Prince Andrew, asked him to wait, and went in
to the Minister of War. Five minutes later he returned and bowing with
particular courtesy ushered Prince Andrew before him along a corridor to the
cabinet where the Minister of War was at work. The adjutant by his elaborate
courtesy appeared to wish to ward off any attempt at familiarity on the part of
the Russian messenger.
Prince Andrew's joyous feeling was considerably weakened as he approached
the door of the minister's room. He felt offended, and without his noticing it
the feeling of offense immediately turned into one of disdain which was quite
uncalled for. His fertile mind instantly suggested to him a point of view which
gave him a right to despise the adjutant and the minister. "Away from the
smell of powder, they probably think it easy to gain victories!" he thought. His
eyes narrowed disdainfully, he entered the room of the Minister of War with
peculiarly deliberate steps. This feeling of disdain was heightened when he
saw the minister seated at a large table reading some papers and making pencil
notes on them, and for the first two or three minutes taking no notice of his
arrival. A wax candle stood at each side of the minister's bent bald head with
its gray temples. He went on reading to the end, without raising his eyes at the
opening of the door and the sound of footsteps.
"Take this and deliver it," said he to his adjutant, handing him the papers and
still taking no notice of the special messenger.
Prince Andrew felt that either the actions of Kutuzov's army interested the
Minister of War less than any of the other matters he was concerned with, or
he wanted to give the Russian special messenger that impression. "But that is a
matter of perfect indifference to me," he thought. The minister drew the
remaining papers together, arranged them evenly, and then raised his head. He
had an intellectual and distinctive head, but the instant he turned to Prince
Andrew the firm, intelligent expression on his face changed in a way evidently
deliberate and habitual to him. His face took on the stupid artificial smile
(which does not even attempt to hide its artificiality) of a man who is
continually receiving many petitioners one after another.
"From General Field Marshal Kutuzov?" he asked. "I hope it is good news?
There has been an encounter with Mortier? A victory? It was high time!"
He took the dispatch which was addressed to him and began to read it with a
mournful expression.
"Oh, my God! My God! Schmidt!" he exclaimed in German. "What a
calamity! What a calamity!"
Having glanced through the dispatch he laid it on the table and looked at
Prince Andrew, evidently considering something.
"Ah what a calamity! You say the affair was decisive? But Mortier is not
captured." Again he pondered. "I am very glad you have brought good news,
though Schmidt's death is a heavy price to pay for the victory. His Majesty
will no doubt wish to see you, but not today. I thank you! You must have a
rest. Be at the levee tomorrow after the parade. However, I will let you know."
The stupid smile, which had left his face while he was speaking, reappeared.
"Au revoir! Thank you very much. His Majesty will probably desire to see
you," he added, bowing his head.
When Prince Andrew left the palace he felt that all the interest and happiness
the victory had afforded him had been now left in the indifferent hands of the
Minister of War and the polite adjutant. The whole tenor of his thoughts
instantaneously changed; the battle seemed the memory of a remote event long
past.
CHAPTER X
Prince Andrew stayed at Brunn with Bilibin, a Russian acquaintance of his in
the diplomatic service.
"Ah, my dear prince! I could not have a more welcome visitor," said Bilibin as
he came out to meet Prince Andrew. "Franz, put the prince's things in my
bedroom," said he to the servant who was ushering Bolkonski in. "So you're a
messenger of victory, eh? Splendid! And I am sitting here ill, as you see."
After washing and dressing, Prince Andrew came into the diplomat's luxurious
study and sat down to the dinner prepared for him. Bilibin settled down
comfortably beside the fire.
After his journey and the campaign during which he had been deprived of all
the comforts of cleanliness and all the refinements of life, Prince Andrew felt a
pleasant sense of repose among luxurious surroundings such as he had been
accustomed to from childhood. Besides it was pleasant, after his reception by
the Austrians, to speak if not in Russian (for they were speaking French) at
least with a Russian who would, he supposed, share the general Russian
antipathy to the Austrians which was then particularly strong.
Bilibin was a man of thirty-five, a bachelor, and of the same circle as Prince
Andrew. They had known each other previously in Petersburg, but had become
more intimate when Prince Andrew was in Vienna with Kutuzov. Just as
Prince Andrew was a young man who gave promise of rising high in the
military profession, so to an even greater extent Bilibin gave promise of rising
in his diplomatic career. He still a young man but no longer a young diplomat,
as he had entered the service at the age of sixteen, had been in Paris and
Copenhagen, and now held a rather important post in Vienna. Both the foreign
minister and our ambassador in Vienna knew him and valued him. He was not
one of those many diplomats who are esteemed because they have certain
negative qualities, avoid doing certain things, and speak French. He was one
of those, who, liking work, knew how to do it, and despite his indolence would
sometimes spend a whole night at his writing table. He worked well whatever
the import of his work. It was not the question "What for?" but the question
"How?" that interested him. What the diplomatic matter might be he did not
care, but it gave him great pleasure to prepare a circular, memorandum, or
report, skillfully, pointedly, and elegantly. Bilibin's services were valued not
only for what he wrote, but also for his skill in dealing and conversing with
those in the highest spheres.
Bilibin liked conversation as he liked work, only when it could be made
elegantly witty. In society he always awaited an opportunity to say something
striking and took part in a conversation only when that was possible. His
conversation was always sprinkled with wittily original, finished phrases of
general interest. These sayings were prepared in the inner laboratory of his
mind in a portable form as if intentionally, so that insignificant society people
might carry them from drawing room to drawing room. And, in fact, Bilibin's
witticisms were hawked about in the Viennese drawing rooms and often had
an influence on matters considered important.
His thin, worn, sallow face was covered with deep wrinkles, which always
looked as clean and well washed as the tips of one's fingers after a Russian
bath. The movement of these wrinkles formed the principal play of expression
on his face. Now his forehead would pucker into deep folds and his eyebrows
were lifted, then his eyebrows would descend and deep wrinkles would crease
his cheeks. His small, deep-set eyes always twinkled and looked out straight.
"Well, now tell me about your exploits," said he.
Bolkonski, very modestly without once mentioning himself, described the
engagement and his reception by the Minister of War.
"They received me and my news as one receives a dog in a game of skittles,"
said he in conclusion.
Bilibin smiled and the wrinkles on his face disappeared.
"Cependant, mon cher," he remarked, examining his nails from a distance and
puckering the skin above his left eye, "malgre la haute estime que je professe
pour the Orthodox Russian army, j'avoue que votre victoire n'est pas des plus
victorieuses." *
* "But my dear fellow, with all my respect for the Orthodox
Russian army, I must say that your victory was not
particularly victorious."
He went on talking in this way in French, uttering only those words in Russian
on which he wished to put a contemptuous emphasis.
"Come now! You with all your forces fall on the unfortunate Mortier and his
one division, and even then Mortier slips through your fingers! Where's the
victory?"
"But seriously," said Prince Andrew, "we can at any rate say without boasting
that it was a little better than at Ulm..."
"Why didn't you capture one, just one, marshal for us?"
"Because not everything happens as one expects or with the smoothness of a
parade. We had expected, as I told you, to get at their rear by seven in the
morning but had not reached it by five in the afternoon."
"And why didn't you do it at seven in the morning? You ought to have been
there at seven in the morning," returned Bilibin with a smile. "You ought to
have been there at seven in the morning."
"Why did you not succeed in impressing on Bonaparte by diplomatic methods
that he had better leave Genoa alone?" retorted Prince Andrew in the same
tone.
"I know," interrupted Bilibin, "you're thinking it's very easy to take marshals,
sitting on a sofa by the fire! That is true, but still why didn't you capture him?
So don't be surprised if not only the Minister of War but also his Most August
Majesty the Emperor and King Francis is not much delighted by your victory.
Even I, a poor secretary of the Russian Embassy, do not feel any need in token
of my joy to give my Franz a thaler, or let him go with his Liebchen to the
Prater... True, we have no Prater here..."
He looked straight at Prince Andrew and suddenly unwrinkled his forehead.
"It is now my turn to ask you 'why?' mon cher," said Bolkonski. "I confess I do
not understand: perhaps there are diplomatic subtleties here beyond my feeble
intelligence, but I can't make it out. Mack loses a whole army, the Archduke
Ferdinand and the Archduke Karl give no signs of life and make blunder after
blunder. Kutuzov alone at last gains a real victory, destroying the spell of the
invincibility of the French, and the Minister of War does not even care to hear
the details."
"That's just it, my dear fellow. You see it's hurrah for the Tsar, for Russia, for
the Orthodox Greek faith! All that is beautiful, but what do we, I mean the
Austrian court, care for your victories? Bring us nice news of a victory by the
Archduke Karl or Ferdinand (one archduke's as good as another, as you know)
and even if it is only over a fire brigade of Bonaparte's, that will be another
story and we'll fire off some cannon! But this sort of thing seems done on
purpose to vex us. The Archduke Karl does nothing, the Archduke Ferdinand
disgraces himself. You abandon Vienna, give up its defense—as much as to
say: 'Heaven is with us, but heaven help you and your capital!' The one
general whom we all loved, Schmidt, you expose to a bullet, and then you
congratulate us on the victory! Admit that more irritating news than yours
could not have been conceived. It's as if it had been done on purpose, on
purpose. Besides, suppose you did gain a brilliant victory, if even the
Archduke Karl gained a victory, what effect would that have on the general
course of events? It's too late now when Vienna is occupied by the French
army!"
"What? Occupied? Vienna occupied?"
"Not only occupied, but Bonaparte is at Schonbrunn, and the count, our dear
Count Vrbna, goes to him for orders."
After the fatigues and impressions of the journey, his reception, and especially
after having dined, Bolkonski felt that he could not take in the full significance
of the words he heard.
"Count Lichtenfels was here this morning," Bilibin continued, "and showed
me a letter in which the parade of the French in Vienna was fully described:
Prince Murat et tout le tremblement... You see that your victory is not a matter
for great rejoicing and that you can't be received as a savior."
"Really I don't care about that, I don't care at all," said Prince Andrew,
beginning to understand that his news of the battle before Krems was really of
small importance in view of such events as the fall of Austria's capital. "How
is it Vienna was taken? What of the bridge and its celebrated bridgehead and
Prince Auersperg? We heard reports that Prince Auersperg was defending
Vienna?" he said.
"Prince Auersperg is on this, on our side of the river, and is defending us—
doing it very badly, I think, but still he is defending us. But Vienna is on the
other side. No, the bridge has not yet been taken and I hope it will not be, for it
is mined and orders have been given to blow it up. Otherwise we should long
ago have been in the mountains of Bohemia, and you and your army would
have spent a bad quarter of an hour between two fires."
"But still this does not mean that the campaign is over," said Prince Andrew.
"Well, I think it is. The bigwigs here think so too, but they daren't say so. It
will be as I said at the beginning of the campaign, it won't be your skirmishing
at Durrenstein, or gunpowder at all, that will decide the matter, but those who
devised it," said Bilibin quoting one of his own mots, releasing the wrinkles on
his forehead, and pausing. "The only question is what will come of the
meeting between the Emperor Alexander and the King of Prussia in Berlin? If
Prussia joins the Allies, Austria's hand will be forced and there will be war. If
not it is merely a question of settling where the preliminaries of the new
Campo Formio are to be drawn up."
"What an extraordinary genius!" Prince Andrew suddenly exclaimed,
clenching his small hand and striking the table with it, "and what luck the man
has!"
"Buonaparte?" said Bilibin inquiringly, puckering up his forehead to indicate
that he was about to say something witty. "Buonaparte?" he repeated,
accentuating the u: "I think, however, now that he lays down laws for Austria
at Schonbrunn, il faut lui faire grace de l'u! * I shall certainly adopt an
innovation and call him simply Bonaparte!"
* "We must let him off the u!"
"But joking apart," said Prince Andrew, "do you really think the campaign is
over?"
"This is what I think. Austria has been made a fool of, and she is not used to it.
She will retaliate. And she has been fooled in the first place because her
provinces have been pillaged—they say the Holy Russian army loots terribly
—her army is destroyed, her capital taken, and all this for the beaux yeux * of
His Sardinian Majesty. And therefore—this is between ourselves—I
instinctively feel that we are being deceived, my instinct tells me of
negotiations with France and projects for peace, a secret peace concluded
separately."
* Fine eyes.
"Impossible!" cried Prince Andrew. "That would be too base."
"If we live we shall see," replied Bilibin, his face again becoming smooth as a
sign that the conversation was at an end.
When Prince Andrew reached the room prepared for him and lay down in a
clean shirt on the feather bed with its warmed and fragrant pillows, he felt that
the battle of which he had brought tidings was far, far away from him. The
alliance with Prussia, Austria's treachery, Bonaparte's new triumph,
tomorrow's levee and parade, and the audience with the Emperor Francis
occupied his thoughts.
He closed his eyes, and immediately a sound of cannonading, of musketry and
the rattling of carriage wheels seemed to fill his ears, and now again drawn out
in a thin line the musketeers were descending the hill, the French were firing,
and he felt his heart palpitating as he rode forward beside Schmidt with the
bullets merrily whistling all around, and he experienced tenfold the joy of
living, as he had not done since childhood.
He woke up...
"Yes, that all happened!" he said, and, smiling happily to himself like a child,
he fell into a deep, youthful slumber.
CHAPTER XI
Next day he woke late. Recalling his recent impressions, the first thought that
came into his mind was that today he had to be presented to the Emperor
Francis; he remembered the Minister of War, the polite Austrian adjutant,
Bilibin, and last night's conversation. Having dressed for his attendance at
court in full parade uniform, which he had not worn for a long time, he went
into Bilibin's study fresh, animated, and handsome, with his hand bandaged. In
the study were four gentlemen of the diplomatic corps. With Prince Hippolyte
Kuragin, who was a secretary to the embassy, Bolkonski was already
acquainted. Bilibin introduced him to the others.
The gentlemen assembled at Bilibin's were young, wealthy, gay society men,
who here, as in Vienna, formed a special set which Bilibin, their leader, called
les notres. * This set, consisting almost exclusively of diplomats, evidently
had its own interests which had nothing to do with war or politics but related
to high society, to certain women, and to the official side of the service. These
gentlemen received Prince Andrew as one of themselves, an honor they did
not extend to many. From politeness and to start conversation, they asked him
a few questions about the army and the battle, and then the talk went off into
merry jests and gossip.
* Ours.
"But the best of it was," said one, telling of the misfortune of a fellow
diplomat, "that the Chancellor told him flatly that his appointment to London
was a promotion and that he was so to regard it. Can you fancy the figure he
cut?..."
"But the worst of it, gentlemen—I am giving Kuragin away to you—is that
that man suffers, and this Don Juan, wicked fellow, is taking advantage of it!"
Prince Hippolyte was lolling in a lounge chair with his legs over its arm. He
began to laugh.
"Tell me about that!" he said.
"Oh, you Don Juan! You serpent!" cried several voices.
"You, Bolkonski, don't know," said Bilibin turning to Prince Andrew, "that all
the atrocities of the French army (I nearly said of the Russian army) are
nothing compared to what this man has been doing among the women!"
"La femme est la compagne de l'homme," * announced Prince Hippolyte, and
began looking through a lorgnette at his elevated legs.
* "Woman is man's companion."
Bilibin and the rest of "ours" burst out laughing in Hippolyte's face, and Prince
Andrew saw that Hippolyte, of whom—he had to admit—he had almost been
jealous on his wife's account, was the butt of this set.
"Oh, I must give you a treat," Bilibin whispered to Bolkonski. "Kuragin is
exquisite when he discusses politics—you should see his gravity!"
He sat down beside Hippolyte and wrinkling his forehead began talking to him
about politics. Prince Andrew and the others gathered round these two.
"The Berlin cabinet cannot express a feeling of alliance," began Hippolyte
gazing round with importance at the others, "without expressing... as in its last
note... you understand... Besides, unless His Majesty the Emperor derogates
from the principle of our alliance...
"Wait, I have not finished..." he said to Prince Andrew, seizing him by the arm,
"I believe that intervention will be stronger than nonintervention. And..." he
paused. "Finally one cannot impute the nonreceipt of our dispatch of
November 18. That is how it will end." And he released Bolkonski's arm to
indicate that he had now quite finished.
"Demosthenes, I know thee by the pebble thou secretest in thy golden mouth!"
said Bilibin, and the mop of hair on his head moved with satisfaction.
Everybody laughed, and Hippolyte louder than anyone. He was evidently
distressed, and breathed painfully, but could not restrain the wild laughter that
convulsed his usually impassive features.
"Well now, gentlemen," said Bilibin, "Bolkonski is my guest in this house and
in Brunn itself. I want to entertain him as far as I can, with all the pleasures of
life here. If we were in Vienna it would be easy, but here, in this wretched
Moravian hole, it is more difficult, and I beg you all to help me. Brunn's
attractions must be shown him. You can undertake the theater, I society, and
you, Hippolyte, of course the women."
"We must let him see Amelie, she's exquisite!" said one of "ours," kissing his
finger tips.
"In general we must turn this bloodthirsty soldier to more humane interests,"
said Bilibin.
"I shall scarcely be able to avail myself of your hospitality, gentlemen, it is
already time for me to go," replied Prince Andrew looking at his watch.
"Where to?"
"To the Emperor."
"Oh! Oh! Oh! Well, au revoir, Bolkonski! Au revoir, Prince! Come back early
to dinner," cried several voices. "We'll take you in hand."
"When speaking to the Emperor, try as far as you can to praise the way that
provisions are supplied and the routes indicated," said Bilibin, accompanying
him to the hall.
"I should like to speak well of them, but as far as I know the facts, I can't,"
replied Bolkonski, smiling.
"Well, talk as much as you can, anyway. He has a passion for giving
audiences, but he does not like talking himself and can't do it, as you will see."
CHAPTER XII
At the levee Prince Andrew stood among the Austrian officers as he had been
told to, and the Emperor Francis merely looked fixedly into his face and just
nodded to him with his long head. But after it was over, the adjutant he had
seen the previous day ceremoniously informed Bolkonski that the Emperor
desired to give him an audience. The Emperor Francis received him standing
in the middle of the room. Before the conversation began Prince Andrew was
struck by the fact that the Emperor seemed confused and blushed as if not
knowing what to say.
"Tell me, when did the battle begin?" he asked hurriedly.
Prince Andrew replied. Then followed other questions just as simple: "Was
Kutuzov well? When had he left Krems?" and so on. The Emperor spoke as if
his sole aim were to put a given number of questions—the answers to these
questions, as was only too evident, did not interest him.
"At what o'clock did the battle begin?" asked the Emperor.
"I cannot inform Your Majesty at what o'clock the battle began at the front, but
at Durrenstein, where I was, our attack began after five in the afternoon,"
replied Bolkonski growing more animated and expecting that he would have a
chance to give a reliable account, which he had ready in his mind, of all he
knew and had seen. But the Emperor smiled and interrupted him.
"How many miles?"
"From where to where, Your Majesty?"
"From Durrenstein to Krems."
"Three and a half miles, Your Majesty."
"The French have abandoned the left bank?"
"According to the scouts the last of them crossed on rafts during the night."
"Is there sufficient forage in Krems?"
"Forage has not been supplied to the extent..."
The Emperor interrupted him.
"At what o'clock was General Schmidt killed?"
"At seven o'clock, I believe."
"At seven o'clock? It's very sad, very sad!"
The Emperor thanked Prince Andrew and bowed. Prince Andrew withdrew
and was immediately surrounded by courtiers on all sides. Everywhere he saw
friendly looks and heard friendly words. Yesterday's adjutant reproached him
for not having stayed at the palace, and offered him his own house. The
Minister of War came up and congratulated him on the Maria Theresa Order of
the third grade, which the Emperor was conferring on him. The Empress'
chamberlain invited him to see Her Majesty. The archduchess also wished to
see him. He did not know whom to answer, and for a few seconds collected his
thoughts. Then the Russian ambassador took him by the shoulder, led him to
the window, and began to talk to him.
Contrary to Bilibin's forecast the news he had brought was joyfully received.
A thanksgiving service was arranged, Kutuzov was awarded the Grand Cross
of Maria Theresa, and the whole army received rewards. Bolkonski was
invited everywhere, and had to spend the whole morning calling on the
principal Austrian dignitaries. Between four and five in the afternoon, having
made all his calls, he was returning to Bilibin's house thinking out a letter to
his father about the battle and his visit to Brunn. At the door he found a
vehicle half full of luggage. Franz, Bilibin's man, was dragging a portmanteau
with some difficulty out of the front door.
Before returning to Bilibin's Prince Andrew had gone to a bookshop to
provide himself with some books for the campaign, and had spent some time
in the shop.
"What is it?" he asked.
"Oh, your excellency!" said Franz, with difficulty rolling the portmanteau into
the vehicle, "we are to move on still farther. The scoundrel is again at our
heels!"
"Eh? What?" asked Prince Andrew.
Bilibin came out to meet him. His usually calm face showed excitement.
"There now! Confess that this is delightful," said he. "This affair of the Thabor
Bridge, at Vienna.... They have crossed without striking a blow!"
Prince Andrew could not understand.
"But where do you come from not to know what every coachman in the town
knows?"
"I come from the archduchess'. I heard nothing there."
"And you didn't see that everybody is packing up?"
"I did not... What is it all about?" inquired Prince Andrew impatiently.
"What's it all about? Why, the French have crossed the bridge that Auersperg
was defending, and the bridge was not blown up: so Murat is now rushing
along the road to Brunn and will be here in a day or two."
"What? Here? But why did they not blow up the bridge, if it was mined?"
"That is what I ask you. No one, not even Bonaparte, knows why."
Bolkonski shrugged his shoulders.
"But if the bridge is crossed it means that the army too is lost? It will be cut
off," said he.
"That's just it," answered Bilibin. "Listen! The French entered Vienna as I told
you. Very well. Next day, which was yesterday, those gentlemen, messieurs les
marechaux, * Murat, Lannes, and Belliard, mount and ride to the bridge.
(Observe that all three are Gascons.) 'Gentlemen,' says one of them, 'you know
the Thabor Bridge is mined and doubly mined and that there are menacing
fortifications at its head and an army of fifteen thousand men has been ordered
to blow up the bridge and not let us cross? But it will please our sovereign the
Emperor Napoleon if we take this bridge, so let us three go and take it!' 'Yes,
let's!' say the others. And off they go and take the bridge, cross it, and now
with their whole army are on this side of the Danube, marching on us, you,
and your lines of communication."
* The marshalls.
"Stop jesting," said Prince Andrew sadly and seriously. This news grieved him
and yet he was pleased.
As soon as he learned that the Russian army was in such a hopeless situation it
occurred to him that it was he who was destined to lead it out of this position;
that here was the Toulon that would lift him from the ranks of obscure officers
and offer him the first step to fame! Listening to Bilibin he was already
imagining how on reaching the army he would give an opinion at the war
council which would be the only one that could save the army, and how he
alone would be entrusted with the executing of the plan.
"Stop this jesting," he said.
"I am not jesting," Bilibin went on. "Nothing is truer or sadder. These
gentlemen ride onto the bridge alone and wave white handkerchiefs; they
assure the officer on duty that they, the marshals, are on their way to negotiate
with Prince Auersperg. He lets them enter the tête-de-pont. * They spin him a
thousand gasconades, saying that the war is over, that the Emperor Francis is
arranging a meeting with Bonaparte, that they desire to see Prince Auersperg,
and so on. The officer sends for Auersperg; these gentlemen embrace the
officers, crack jokes, sit on the cannon, and meanwhile a French battalion gets
to the bridge unobserved, flings the bags of incendiary material into the water,
and approaches the tête-de-pont. At length appears the lieutenant general, our
dear Prince Auersperg von Mautern himself. 'Dearest foe! Flower of the
Austrian army, hero of the Turkish wars Hostilities are ended, we can shake
one another's hand.... The Emperor Napoleon burns with impatience to make
Prince Auersperg's acquaintance.' In a word, those gentlemen, Gascons indeed,
so bewildered him with fine words, and he is so flattered by his rapidly
established intimacy with the French marshals, and so dazzled by the sight of
Murat's mantle and ostrich plumes, qu'il n'y voit que du feu, et oublie celui
qu'il devait faire faire sur l'ennemi!" *(2) In spite of the animation of his
speech, Bilibin did not forget to pause after this mot to give time for its due
appreciation. "The French battalion rushes to the bridgehead, spikes the guns,
and the bridge is taken! But what is best of all," he went on, his excitement
subsiding under the delightful interest of his own story, "is that the sergeant in
charge of the cannon which was to give the signal to fire the mines and blow
up the bridge, this sergeant, seeing that the French troops were running onto
the bridge, was about to fire, but Lannes stayed his hand. The sergeant, who
was evidently wiser than his general, goes up to Auersperg and says: 'Prince,
you are being deceived, here are the French!' Murat, seeing that all is lost if
the sergeant is allowed to speak, turns to Auersperg with feigned astonishment
(he is a true Gascon) and says: 'I don't recognize the world-famous Austrian
discipline, if you allow a subordinate to address you like that!' It was a stroke
of genius. Prince Auersperg feels his dignity at stake and orders the sergeant to
be arrested. Come, you must own that this affair of the Thabor Bridge is
delightful! It is not exactly stupidity, nor rascality...."
* Bridgehead.
* (2) That their fire gets into his eyes and he forgets that
he ought to be firing at the enemy.
"It may be treachery," said Prince Andrew, vividly imagining the gray
overcoats, wounds, the smoke of gunpowder, the sounds of firing, and the
glory that awaited him.
"Not that either. That puts the court in too bad a light," replied Bilibin. "It's not
treachery nor rascality nor stupidity: it is just as at Ulm... it is..."—he seemed
to be trying to find the right expression. "C'est... c'est du Mack. Nous sommes
mackes (It is... it is a bit of Mack. We are Macked)," he concluded, feeling that
he had produced a good epigram, a fresh one that would be repeated. His
hitherto puckered brow became smooth as a sign of pleasure, and with a slight
smile he began to examine his nails.
"Where are you off to?" he said suddenly to Prince Andrew who had risen and
was going toward his room.
"I am going away."
"Where to?"
"To the army."
"But you meant to stay another two days?"
"But now I am off at once."
And Prince Andrew after giving directions about his departure went to his
room.
"Do you know, mon cher," said Bilibin following him, "I have been thinking
about you. Why are you going?"
And in proof of the conclusiveness of his opinion all the wrinkles vanished
from his face.
Prince Andrew looked inquiringly at him and gave no reply.
"Why are you going? I know you think it your duty to gallop back to the army
now that it is in danger. I understand that. Mon cher, it is heroism!"
"Not at all," said Prince Andrew.
"But as you are a philosopher, be a consistent one, look at the other side of the
question and you will see that your duty, on the contrary, is to take care of
yourself. Leave it to those who are no longer fit for anything else.... You have
not been ordered to return and have not been dismissed from here; therefore,
you can stay and go with us wherever our ill luck takes us. They say we are
going to Olmutz, and Olmutz is a very decent town. You and I will travel
comfortably in my caleche."
"Do stop joking, Bilibin," cried Bolkonski.
"I am speaking sincerely as a friend! Consider! Where and why are you going,
when you might remain here? You are faced by one of two things," and the
skin over his left temple puckered, "either you will not reach your regiment
before peace is concluded, or you will share defeat and disgrace with
Kutuzov's whole army."
And Bilibin unwrinkled his temple, feeling that the dilemma was insoluble.
"I cannot argue about it," replied Prince Andrew coldly, but he thought: "I am
going to save the army."
"My dear fellow, you are a hero!" said Bilibin.
CHAPTER XIII
That same night, having taken leave of the Minister of War, Bolkonski set off
to rejoin the army, not knowing where he would find it and fearing to be
captured by the French on the way to Krems.
In Brunn everybody attached to the court was packing up, and the heavy
baggage was already being dispatched to Olmutz. Near Hetzelsdorf Prince
Andrew struck the high road along which the Russian army was moving with
great haste and in the greatest disorder. The road was so obstructed with carts
that it was impossible to get by in a carriage. Prince Andrew took a horse and
a Cossack from a Cossack commander, and hungry and weary, making his
way past the baggage wagons, rode in search of the commander-in-chief and
of his own luggage. Very sinister reports of the position of the army reached
him as he went along, and the appearance of the troops in their disorderly
flight confirmed these rumors.
"Cette armee russe que l'or de l'Angleterre a transportee des extremites de
l'univers, nous allons lui faire eprouver le meme sort—(le sort de l'armee
d'Ulm)." * He remembered these words in Bonaparte's address to his army at
the beginning of the campaign, and they awoke in him astonishment at the
genius of his hero, a feeling of wounded pride, and a hope of glory. "And
should there be nothing left but to die?" he thought. "Well, if need be, I shall
do it no worse than others."
* "That Russian army which has been brought from the ends of
the earth by English gold, we shall cause to share the same
fate—(the fate of the army at Ulm)."
He looked with disdain at the endless confused mass of detachments, carts,
guns, artillery, and again baggage wagons and vehicles of all kinds overtaking
one another and blocking the muddy road, three and sometimes four abreast.
From all sides, behind and before, as far as ear could reach, there were the
rattle of wheels, the creaking of carts and gun carriages, the tramp of horses,
the crack of whips, shouts, the urging of horses, and the swearing of soldiers,
orderlies, and officers. All along the sides of the road fallen horses were to be
seen, some flayed, some not, and broken-down carts beside which solitary
soldiers sat waiting for something, and again soldiers straggling from their
companies, crowds of whom set off to the neighboring villages, or returned
from them dragging sheep, fowls, hay, and bulging sacks. At each ascent or
descent of the road the crowds were yet denser and the din of shouting more
incessant. Soldiers floundering knee-deep in mud pushed the guns and wagons
themselves. Whips cracked, hoofs slipped, traces broke, and lungs were
strained with shouting. The officers directing the march rode backward and
forward between the carts. Their voices were but feebly heard amid the uproar
and one saw by their faces that they despaired of the possibility of checking
this disorder.
"Here is our dear Orthodox Russian army," thought Bolkonski, recalling
Bilibin's words.
Wishing to find out where the commander-in-chief was, he rode up to a
convoy. Directly opposite to him came a strange one-horse vehicle, evidently
rigged up by soldiers out of any available materials and looking like
something between a cart, a cabriolet, and a caleche. A soldier was driving,
and a woman enveloped in shawls sat behind the apron under the leather hood
of the vehicle. Prince Andrew rode up and was just putting his question to a
soldier when his attention was diverted by the desperate shrieks of the woman
in the vehicle. An officer in charge of transport was beating the soldier who
was driving the woman's vehicle for trying to get ahead of others, and the
strokes of his whip fell on the apron of the equipage. The woman screamed
piercingly. Seeing Prince Andrew she leaned out from behind the apron and,
waving her thin arms from under the woolen shawl, cried:
"Mr. Aide-de-camp! Mr. Aide-de-camp!... For heaven's sake... Protect me!
What will become of us? I am the wife of the doctor of the Seventh
Chasseurs.... They won't let us pass, we are left behind and have lost our
people..."
"I'll flatten you into a pancake!" shouted the angry officer to the soldier. "Turn
back with your slut!"
"Mr. Aide-de-camp! Help me!... What does it all mean?" screamed the doctor's
wife.
"Kindly let this cart pass. Don't you see it's a woman?" said Prince Andrew
riding up to the officer.
The officer glanced at him, and without replying turned again to the soldier.
"I'll teach you to push on!... Back!"
"Let them pass, I tell you!" repeated Prince Andrew, compressing his lips.
"And who are you?" cried the officer, turning on him with tipsy rage, "who are
you? Are you in command here? Eh? I am commander here, not you! Go back
or I'll flatten you into a pancake," repeated he. This expression evidently
pleased him.
"That was a nice snub for the little aide-de-camp," came a voice from behind.
Prince Andrew saw that the officer was in that state of senseless, tipsy rage
when a man does not know what he is saying. He saw that his championship
of the doctor's wife in her queer trap might expose him to what he dreaded
more than anything in the world—to ridicule; but his instinct urged him on.
Before the officer finished his sentence Prince Andrew, his face distorted with
fury, rode up to him and raised his riding whip.
"Kind...ly let—them—pass!"
The officer flourished his arm and hastily rode away.
"It's all the fault of these fellows on the staff that there's this disorder," he
muttered. "Do as you like."
Prince Andrew without lifting his eyes rode hastily away from the doctor's
wife, who was calling him her deliverer, and recalling with a sense of disgust
the minutest details of this humiliating scene he galloped on to the village
where he was told that the commander-in-chief was.
On reaching the village he dismounted and went to the nearest house,
intending to rest if but for a moment, eat something, and try to sort out the
stinging and tormenting thoughts that confused his mind. "This is a mob of
scoundrels and not an army," he was thinking as he went up to the window of
the first house, when a familiar voice called him by name.
He turned round. Nesvitski's handsome face looked out of the little window.
Nesvitski, moving his moist lips as he chewed something, and flourishing his
arm, called him to enter.
"Bolkonski! Bolkonski!... Don't you hear? Eh? Come quick..." he shouted.
Entering the house, Prince Andrew saw Nesvitski and another adjutant having
something to eat. They hastily turned round to him asking if he had any news.
On their familiar faces he read agitation and alarm. This was particularly
noticeable on Nesvitski's usually laughing countenance.
"Where is the commander-in-chief?" asked Bolkonski.
"Here, in that house," answered the adjutant.
"Well, is it true that it's peace and capitulation?" asked Nesvitski.
"I was going to ask you. I know nothing except that it was all I could do to get
here."
"And we, my dear boy! It's terrible! I was wrong to laugh at Mack, we're
getting it still worse," said Nesvitski. "But sit down and have something to
eat."
"You won't be able to find either your baggage or anything else now, Prince.
And God only knows where your man Peter is," said the other adjutant.
"Where are headquarters?"
"We are to spend the night in Znaim."
"Well, I have got all I need into packs for two horses," said Nesvitski.
"They've made up splendid packs for me—fit to cross the Bohemian
mountains with. It's a bad lookout, old fellow! But what's the matter with you?
You must be ill to shiver like that," he added, noticing that Prince Andrew
winced as at an electric shock.
"It's nothing," replied Prince Andrew.
He had just remembered his recent encounter with the doctor's wife and the
convoy officer.
"What is the commander-in-chief doing here?" he asked.
"I can't make out at all," said Nesvitski.
"Well, all I can make out is that everything is abominable, abominable, quite
abominable!" said Prince Andrew, and he went off to the house where the
commander-in-chief was.
Passing by Kutuzov's carriage and the exhausted saddle horses of his suite,
with their Cossacks who were talking loudly together, Prince Andrew entered
the passage. Kutuzov himself, he was told, was in the house with Prince
Bagration and Weyrother. Weyrother was the Austrian general who had
succeeded Schmidt. In the passage little Kozlovski was squatting on his heels
in front of a clerk. The clerk, with cuffs turned up, was hastily writing at a tub
turned bottom upwards. Kozlovski's face looked worn—he too had evidently
not slept all night. He glanced at Prince Andrew and did not even nod to him.
"Second line... have you written it?" he continued dictating to the clerk. "The
Kiev Grenadiers, Podolian..."
"One can't write so fast, your honor," said the clerk, glancing angrily and
disrespectfully at Kozlovski.
Through the door came the sounds of Kutuzov's voice, excited and
dissatisfied, interrupted by another, an unfamiliar voice. From the sound of
these voices, the inattentive way Kozlovski looked at him, the disrespectful
manner of the exhausted clerk, the fact that the clerk and Kozlovski were
squatting on the floor by a tub so near to the commander in chief, and from the
noisy laughter of the Cossacks holding the horses near the window, Prince
Andrew felt that something important and disastrous was about to happen.
He turned to Kozlovski with urgent questions.
"Immediately, Prince," said Kozlovski. "Dispositions for Bagration."
"What about capitulation?"
"Nothing of the sort. Orders are issued for a battle."
Prince Andrew moved toward the door from whence voices were heard. Just
as he was going to open it the sounds ceased, the door opened, and Kutuzov
with his eagle nose and puffy face appeared in the doorway. Prince Andrew
stood right in front of Kutuzov but the expression of the commander in chief's
one sound eye showed him to be so preoccupied with thoughts and anxieties
as to be oblivious of his presence. He looked straight at his adjutant's face
without recognizing him.
"Well, have you finished?" said he to Kozlovski.
"One moment, your excellency."
Bagration, a gaunt middle-aged man of medium height with a firm, impassive
face of Oriental type, came out after the commander-in-chief.
"I have the honor to present myself," repeated Prince Andrew rather loudly,
handing Kutuzov an envelope.
"Ah, from Vienna? Very good. Later, later!"
Kutuzov went out into the porch with Bagration.
"Well, good-by, Prince," said he to Bagration. "My blessing, and may Christ
be with you in your great endeavor!"
His face suddenly softened and tears came into his eyes. With his left hand he
drew Bagration toward him, and with his right, on which he wore a ring, he
made the sign of the cross over him with a gesture evidently habitual, offering
his puffy cheek, but Bagration kissed him on the neck instead.
"Christ be with you!" Kutuzov repeated and went toward his carriage. "Get in
with me," said he to Bolkonski.
"Your excellency, I should like to be of use here. Allow me to remain with
Prince Bagration's detachment."
"Get in," said Kutuzov, and noticing that Bolkonski still delayed, he added: "I
need good officers myself, need them myself!"
They got into the carriage and drove for a few minutes in silence.
"There is still much, much before us," he said, as if with an old man's
penetration he understood all that was passing in Bolkonski's mind. "If a tenth
part of his detachment returns I shall thank God," he added as if speaking to
himself.
Prince Andrew glanced at Kutuzov's face only a foot distant from him and
involuntarily noticed the carefully washed seams of the scar near his temple,
where an Ismail bullet had pierced his skull, and the empty eye socket. "Yes,
he has a right to speak so calmly of those men's death," thought Bolkonski.
"That is why I beg to be sent to that detachment," he said.
Kutuzov did not reply. He seemed to have forgotten what he had been saying,
and sat plunged in thought. Five minutes later, gently swaying on the soft
springs of the carriage, he turned to Prince Andrew. There was not a trace of
agitation on his face. With delicate irony he questioned Prince Andrew about
the details of his interview with the Emperor, about the remarks he had heard
at court concerning the Krems affair, and about some ladies they both knew.
CHAPTER XIV
On November 1 Kutuzov had received, through a spy, news that the army he
commanded was in an almost hopeless position. The spy reported that the
French, after crossing the bridge at Vienna, were advancing in immense force
upon Kutuzov's line of communication with the troops that were arriving from
Russia. If Kutuzov decided to remain at Krems, Napoleon's army of one
hundred and fifty thousand men would cut him off completely and surround
his exhausted army of forty thousand, and he would find himself in the
position of Mack at Ulm. If Kutuzov decided to abandon the road connecting
him with the troops arriving from Russia, he would have to march with no
road into unknown parts of the Bohemian mountains, defending himself
against superior forces of the enemy and abandoning all hope of a junction
with Buxhowden. If Kutuzov decided to retreat along the road from Krems to
Olmutz, to unite with the troops arriving from Russia, he risked being
forestalled on that road by the French who had crossed the Vienna bridge, and
encumbered by his baggage and transport, having to accept battle on the
march against an enemy three times as strong, who would hem him in from
two sides.
Kutuzov chose this latter course.
The French, the spy reported, having crossed the Vienna bridge, were
advancing by forced marches toward Znaim, which lay sixty-six miles off on
the line of Kutuzov's retreat. If he reached Znaim before the French, there
would be great hope of saving the army; to let the French forestall him at
Znaim meant the exposure of his whole army to a disgrace such as that of
Ulm, or to utter destruction. But to forestall the French with his whole army
was impossible. The road for the French from Vienna to Znaim was shorter
and better than the road for the Russians from Krems to Znaim.
The night he received the news, Kutuzov sent Bagration's vanguard, four
thousand strong, to the right across the hills from the Krems-Znaim to the
Vienna-Znaim road. Bagration was to make this march without resting, and to
halt facing Vienna with Znaim to his rear, and if he succeeded in forestalling
the French he was to delay them as long as possible. Kutuzov himself with all
his transport took the road to Znaim.
Marching thirty miles that stormy night across roadless hills, with his hungry,
ill-shod soldiers, and losing a third of his men as stragglers by the way,
Bagration came out on the Vienna-Znaim road at Hollabrunn a few hours
ahead of the French who were approaching Hollabrunn from Vienna. Kutuzov
with his transport had still to march for some days before he could reach
Znaim. Hence Bagration with his four thousand hungry, exhausted men would
have to detain for days the whole enemy army that came upon him at
Hollabrunn, which was clearly impossible. But a freak of fate made the
impossible possible. The success of the trick that had placed the Vienna bridge
in the hands of the French without a fight led Murat to try to deceive Kutuzov
in a similar way. Meeting Bagration's weak detachment on the Znaim road he
supposed it to be Kutuzov's whole army. To be able to crush it absolutely he
awaited the arrival of the rest of the troops who were on their way from
Vienna, and with this object offered a three days' truce on condition that both
armies should remain in position without moving. Murat declared that
negotiations for peace were already proceeding, and that he therefore offered
this truce to avoid unnecessary bloodshed. Count Nostitz, the Austrian general
occupying the advanced posts, believed Murat's emissary and retired, leaving
Bagration's division exposed. Another emissary rode to the Russian line to
announce the peace negotiations and to offer the Russian army the three days'
truce. Bagration replied that he was not authorized either to accept or refuse a
truce and sent his adjutant to Kutuzov to report the offer he had received.
A truce was Kutuzov's sole chance of gaining time, giving Bagration's
exhausted troops some rest, and letting the transport and heavy convoys
(whose movements were concealed from the French) advance if but one stage
nearer Znaim. The offer of a truce gave the only, and a quite unexpected,
chance of saving the army. On receiving the news he immediately dispatched
Adjutant General Wintzingerode, who was in attendance on him, to the enemy
camp. Wintzingerode was not merely to agree to the truce but also to offer
terms of capitulation, and meanwhile Kutuzov sent his adjutants back to
hasten to the utmost the movements of the baggage trains of the entire army
along the Krems-Znaim road. Bagration's exhausted and hungry detachment,
which alone covered this movement of the transport and of the whole army,
had to remain stationary in face of an enemy eight times as strong as itself.
Kutuzov's expectations that the proposals of capitulation (which were in no
way binding) might give time for part of the transport to pass, and also that
Murat's mistake would very soon be discovered, proved correct. As soon as
Bonaparte (who was at Schonbrunn, sixteen miles from Hollabrunn) received
Murat's dispatch with the proposal of a truce and a capitulation, he detected a
ruse and wrote the following letter to Murat:
Schonbrunn, 25th Brumaire, 1805,
at eight o'clock in the morning
To PRINCE MURAT,
I cannot find words to express to you my displeasure. You command only my
advance guard, and have no right to arrange an armistice without my order.
You are causing me to lose the fruits of a campaign. Break the armistice
immediately and march on the enemy. Inform him that the general who signed
that capitulation had no right to do so, and that no one but the Emperor of
Russia has that right.
If, however, the Emperor of Russia ratifies that convention, I will ratify it; but
it is only a trick. March on, destroy the Russian army.... You are in a position
to seize its baggage and artillery.
The Russian Emperor's aide-de-camp is an impostor. Officers are nothing
when they have no powers; this one had none.... The Austrians let themselves
be tricked at the crossing of the Vienna bridge, you are letting yourself be
tricked by an aide-de-camp of the Emperor.
NAPOLEON
Bonaparte's adjutant rode full gallop with this menacing letter to Murat.
Bonaparte himself, not trusting to his generals, moved with all the Guards to
the field of battle, afraid of letting a ready victim escape, and Bagration's four
thousand men merrily lighted campfires, dried and warmed themselves,
cooked their porridge for the first time for three days, and not one of them
knew or imagined what was in store for him.
CHAPTER XV
Between three and four o'clock in the afternoon Prince Andrew, who had
persisted in his request to Kutuzov, arrived at Grunth and reported himself to
Bagration. Bonaparte's adjutant had not yet reached Murat's detachment and
the battle had not yet begun. In Bagration's detachment no one knew anything
of the general position of affairs. They talked of peace but did not believe in
its possibility; others talked of a battle but also disbelieved in the nearness of
an engagement. Bagration, knowing Bolkonski to be a favorite and trusted
adjutant, received him with distinction and special marks of favor, explaining
to him that there would probably be an engagement that day or the next, and
giving him full liberty to remain with him during the battle or to join the
rearguard and have an eye on the order of retreat, "which is also very
important."
"However, there will hardly be an engagement today," said Bagration as if to
reassure Prince Andrew.
"If he is one of the ordinary little staff dandies sent to earn a medal he can get
his reward just as well in the rearguard, but if he wishes to stay with me, let
him... he'll be of use here if he's a brave officer," thought Bagration. Prince
Andrew, without replying, asked the prince's permission to ride round the
position to see the disposition of the forces, so as to know his bearings should
he be sent to execute an order. The officer on duty, a handsome, elegantly
dressed man with a diamond ring on his forefinger, who was fond of speaking
French though he spoke it badly, offered to conduct Prince Andrew.
On all sides they saw rain-soaked officers with dejected faces who seemed to
be seeking something, and soldiers dragging doors, benches, and fencing from
the village.
"There now, Prince! We can't stop those fellows," said the staff officer
pointing to the soldiers. "The officers don't keep them in hand. And there," he
pointed to a sutler's tent, "they crowd in and sit. This morning I turned them all
out and now look, it's full again. I must go there, Prince, and scare them a bit.
It won't take a moment."
"Yes, let's go in and I will get myself a roll and some cheese," said Prince
Andrew who had not yet had time to eat anything.
"Why didn't you mention it, Prince? I would have offered you something."
They dismounted and entered the tent. Several officers, with flushed and
weary faces, were sitting at the table eating and drinking.
"Now what does this mean, gentlemen?" said the staff officer, in the
reproachful tone of a man who has repeated the same thing more than once.
"You know it won't do to leave your posts like this. The prince gave orders
that no one should leave his post. Now you, Captain," and he turned to a thin,
dirty little artillery officer who without his boots (he had given them to the
canteen keeper to dry), in only his stockings, rose when they entered, smiling
not altogether comfortably.
"Well, aren't you ashamed of yourself, Captain Tushin?" he continued. "One
would think that as an artillery officer you would set a good example, yet here
you are without your boots! The alarm will be sounded and you'll be in a
pretty position without your boots!" (The staff officer smiled.) "Kindly return
to your posts, gentlemen, all of you, all!" he added in a tone of command.
Prince Andrew smiled involuntarily as he looked at the artillery officer Tushin,
who silent and smiling, shifting from one stockinged foot to the other, glanced
inquiringly with his large, intelligent, kindly eyes from Prince Andrew to the
staff officer.
"The soldiers say it feels easier without boots," said Captain Tushin smiling
shyly in his uncomfortable position, evidently wishing to adopt a jocular tone.
But before he had finished he felt that his jest was unacceptable and had not
come off. He grew confused.
"Kindly return to your posts," said the staff officer trying to preserve his
gravity.
Prince Andrew glanced again at the artillery officer's small figure. There was
something peculiar about it, quite unsoldierly, rather comic, but extremely
attractive.
The staff officer and Prince Andrew mounted their horses and rode on.
Having ridden beyond the village, continually meeting and overtaking soldiers
and officers of various regiments, they saw on their left some entrenchments
being thrown up, the freshly dug clay of which showed up red. Several
battalions of soldiers, in their shirt sleeves despite the cold wind, swarmed in
these earthworks like a host of white ants; spadefuls of red clay were
continually being thrown up from behind the bank by unseen hands. Prince
Andrew and the officer rode up, looked at the entrenchment, and went on
again. Just behind it they came upon some dozens of soldiers, continually
replaced by others, who ran from the entrenchment. They had to hold their
noses and put their horses to a trot to escape from the poisoned atmosphere of
these latrines.
"Voila l'agrement des camps, monsieur le Prince," * said the staff officer.
* "This is a pleasure one gets in camp, Prince."
They rode up the opposite hill. From there the French could already be seen.
Prince Andrew stopped and began examining the position.
"That's our battery," said the staff officer indicating the highest point. "It's in
charge of the queer fellow we saw without his boots. You can see everything
from there; let's go there, Prince."
"Thank you very much, I will go on alone," said Prince Andrew, wishing to rid
himself of this staff officer's company, "please don't trouble yourself further."
The staff officer remained behind and Prince Andrew rode on alone.
The farther forward and nearer the enemy he went, the more orderly and
cheerful were the troops. The greatest disorder and depression had been in the
baggage train he had passed that morning on the Znaim road seven miles away
from the French. At Grunth also some apprehension and alarm could be felt,
but the nearer Prince Andrew came to the French lines the more confident was
the appearance of our troops. The soldiers in their greatcoats were ranged in
lines, the sergeants major and company officers were counting the men,
poking the last man in each section in the ribs and telling him to hold his hand
up. Soldiers scattered over the whole place were dragging logs and brushwood
and were building shelters with merry chatter and laughter; around the fires sat
others, dressed and undressed, drying their shirts and leg bands or mending
boots or overcoats and crowding round the boilers and porridge cookers. In
one company dinner was ready, and the soldiers were gazing eagerly at the
steaming boiler, waiting till the sample, which a quartermaster sergeant was
carrying in a wooden bowl to an officer who sat on a log before his shelter,
had been tasted.
Another company, a lucky one for not all the companies had vodka, crowded
round a pockmarked, broad-shouldered sergeant major who, tilting a keg,
filled one after another the canteen lids held out to him. The soldiers lifted the
canteen lids to their lips with reverential faces, emptied them, rolling the
vodka in their mouths, and walked away from the sergeant major with
brightened expressions, licking their lips and wiping them on the sleeves of
their greatcoats. All their faces were as serene as if all this were happening at
home awaiting peaceful encampment, and not within sight of the enemy
before an action in which at least half of them would be left on the field. After
passing a chasseur regiment and in the lines of the Kiev grenadiers—fine
fellows busy with similar peaceful affairs—near the shelter of the regimental
commander, higher than and different from the others, Prince Andrew came
out in front of a platoon of grenadiers before whom lay a naked man. Two
soldiers held him while two others were flourishing their switches and striking
him regularly on his bare back. The man shrieked unnaturally. A stout major
was pacing up and down the line, and regardless of the screams kept repeating:
"It's a shame for a soldier to steal; a soldier must be honest, honorable, and
brave, but if he robs his fellows there is no honor in him, he's a scoundrel. Go
on! Go on!"
So the swishing sound of the strokes, and the desperate but unnatural screams,
continued.
"Go on, go on!" said the major.
A young officer with a bewildered and pained expression on his face stepped
away from the man and looked round inquiringly at the adjutant as he rode by.
Prince Andrew, having reached the front line, rode along it. Our front line and
that of the enemy were far apart on the right and left flanks, but in the center
where the men with a flag of truce had passed that morning, the lines were so
near together that the men could see one another's faces and speak to one
another. Besides the soldiers who formed the picket line on either side, there
were many curious onlookers who, jesting and laughing, stared at their strange
foreign enemies.
Since early morning—despite an injunction not to approach the picket line—
the officers had been unable to keep sight-seers away. The soldiers forming the
picket line, like showmen exhibiting a curiosity, no longer looked at the
French but paid attention to the sight-seers and grew weary waiting to be
relieved. Prince Andrew halted to have a look at the French.
"Look! Look there!" one soldier was saying to another, pointing to a Russian
musketeer who had gone up to the picket line with an officer and was rapidly
and excitedly talking to a French grenadier. "Hark to him jabbering! Fine, isn't
it? It's all the Frenchy can do to keep up with him. There now, Sidorov!"
"Wait a bit and listen. It's fine!" answered Sidorov, who was considered an
adept at French.
The soldier to whom the laughers referred was Dolokhov. Prince Andrew
recognized him and stopped to listen to what he was saying. Dolokhov had
come from the left flank where their regiment was stationed, with his captain.
"Now then, go on, go on!" incited the officer, bending forward and trying not
to lose a word of the speech which was incomprehensible to him. "More,
please: more! What's he saying?"
Dolokhov did not answer the captain; he had been drawn into a hot dispute
with the French grenadier. They were naturally talking about the campaign.
The Frenchman, confusing the Austrians with the Russians, was trying to
prove that the Russians had surrendered and had fled all the way from Ulm,
while Dolokhov maintained that the Russians had not surrendered but had
beaten the French.
"We have orders to drive you off here, and we shall drive you off," said
Dolokhov.
"Only take care you and your Cossacks are not all captured!" said the French
grenadier.
The French onlookers and listeners laughed.
"We'll make you dance as we did under Suvorov...," * said Dolokhov.
* "On vous fera danser."
"Qu' est-ce qu'il chante?" * asked a Frenchman.
* "What's he singing about?"
"It's ancient history," said another, guessing that it referred to a former war.
"The Emperor will teach your Suvara as he has taught the others..."
"Bonaparte..." began Dolokhov, but the Frenchman interrupted him.
"Not Bonaparte. He is the Emperor! Sacre nom...!" cried he angrily.
"The devil skin your Emperor."
And Dolokhov swore at him in coarse soldier's Russian and shouldering his
musket walked away.
"Let us go, Ivan Lukich," he said to the captain.
"Ah, that's the way to talk French," said the picket soldiers. "Now, Sidorov,
you have a try!"
Sidorov, turning to the French, winked, and began to jabber meaningless
sounds very fast: "Kari, mala, tafa, safi, muter, Kaska," he said, trying to give
an expressive intonation to his voice.
"Ho! ho! ho! Ha! ha! ha! ha! Ouh! ouh!" came peals of such healthy and goodhumored laughter from the soldiers that it infected the French involuntarily, so
much so that the only thing left to do seemed to be to unload the muskets,
explode the ammunition, and all return home as quickly as possible.
But the guns remained loaded, the loopholes in blockhouses and
entrenchments looked out just as menacingly, and the unlimbered cannon
confronted one another as before.
CHAPTER XVI
Having ridden round the whole line from right flank to left, Prince Andrew
made his way up to the battery from which the staff officer had told him the
whole field could be seen. Here he dismounted, and stopped beside the farthest
of the four unlimbered cannon. Before the guns an artillery sentry was pacing
up and down; he stood at attention when the officer arrived, but at a sign
resumed his measured, monotonous pacing. Behind the guns were their
limbers and still farther back picket ropes and artillerymen's bonfires. To the
left, not far from the farthest cannon, was a small, newly constructed wattle
shed from which came the sound of officers' voices in eager conversation.
It was true that a view over nearly the whole Russian position and the greater
part of the enemy's opened out from this battery. Just facing it, on the crest of
the opposite hill, the village of Schon Grabern could be seen, and in three
places to left and right the French troops amid the smoke of their campfires,
the greater part of whom were evidently in the village itself and behind the
hill. To the left from that village, amid the smoke, was something resembling a
battery, but it was impossible to see it clearly with the naked eye. Our right
flank was posted on a rather steep incline which dominated the French
position. Our infantry were stationed there, and at the farthest point the
dragoons. In the center, where Tushin's battery stood and from which Prince
Andrew was surveying the position, was the easiest and most direct descent
and ascent to the brook separating us from Schon Grabern. On the left our
troops were close to a copse, in which smoked the bonfires of our infantry
who were felling wood. The French line was wider than ours, and it was plain
that they could easily outflank us on both sides. Behind our position was a
steep and deep dip, making it difficult for artillery and cavalry to retire. Prince
Andrew took out his notebook and, leaning on the cannon, sketched a plan of
the position. He made some notes on two points, intending to mention them to
Bagration. His idea was, first, to concentrate all the artillery in the center, and
secondly, to withdraw the cavalry to the other side of the dip. Prince Andrew,
being always near the commander in chief, closely following the mass
movements and general orders, and constantly studying historical accounts of
battles, involuntarily pictured to himself the course of events in the
forthcoming action in broad outline. He imagined only important possibilities:
"If the enemy attacks the right flank," he said to himself, "the Kiev grenadiers
and the Podolsk chasseurs must hold their position till reserves from the center
come up. In that case the dragoons could successfully make a flank
counterattack. If they attack our center we, having the center battery on this
high ground, shall withdraw the left flank under its cover, and retreat to the dip
by echelons." So he reasoned.... All the time he had been beside the gun, he
had heard the voices of the officers distinctly, but as often happens had not
understood a word of what they were saying. Suddenly, however, he was
struck by a voice coming from the shed, and its tone was so sincere that he
could not but listen.
"No, friend," said a pleasant and, as it seemed to Prince Andrew, a familiar
voice, "what I say is that if it were possible to know what is beyond death,
none of us would be afraid of it. That's so, friend."
Another, a younger voice, interrupted him: "Afraid or not, you can't escape it
anyhow."
"All the same, one is afraid! Oh, you clever people," said a third manly voice
interrupting them both. "Of course you artillery men are very wise, because
you can take everything along with you—vodka and snacks."
And the owner of the manly voice, evidently an infantry officer, laughed.
"Yes, one is afraid," continued the first speaker, he of the familiar voice. "One
is afraid of the unknown, that's what it is. Whatever we may say about the soul
going to the sky... we know there is no sky but only an atmosphere."
The manly voice again interrupted the artillery officer.
"Well, stand us some of your herb vodka, Tushin," it said.
"Why," thought Prince Andrew, "that's the captain who stood up in the sutler's
hut without his boots." He recognized the agreeable, philosophizing voice with
pleasure.
"Some herb vodka? Certainly!" said Tushin. "But still, to conceive a future
life..."
He did not finish. Just then there was a whistle in the air; nearer and nearer,
faster and louder, louder and faster, a cannon ball, as if it had not finished
saying what was necessary, thudded into the ground near the shed with super
human force, throwing up a mass of earth. The ground seemed to groan at the
terrible impact.
And immediately Tushin, with a short pipe in the corner of his mouth and his
kind, intelligent face rather pale, rushed out of the shed followed by the owner
of the manly voice, a dashing infantry officer who hurried off to his company,
buttoning up his coat as he ran.
CHAPTER XVII
Mounting his horse again Prince Andrew lingered with the battery, looking at
the puff from the gun that had sent the ball. His eyes ran rapidly over the wide
space, but he only saw that the hitherto motionless masses of the French now
swayed and that there really was a battery to their left. The smoke above it had
not yet dispersed. Two mounted Frenchmen, probably adjutants, were
galloping up the hill. A small but distinctly visible enemy column was moving
down the hill, probably to strengthen the front line. The smoke of the first shot
had not yet dispersed before another puff appeared, followed by a report. The
battle had begun! Prince Andrew turned his horse and galloped back to Grunth
to find Prince Bagration. He heard the cannonade behind him growing louder
and more frequent. Evidently our guns had begun to reply. From the bottom of
the slope, where the parleys had taken place, came the report of musketry.
Lemarrois had just arrived at a gallop with Bonaparte's stern letter, and Murat,
humiliated and anxious to expiate his fault, had at once moved his forces to
attack the center and outflank both the Russian wings, hoping before evening
and before the arrival of the Emperor to crush the contemptible detachment
that stood before him.
"It has begun. Here it is!" thought Prince Andrew, feeling the blood rush to his
heart. "But where and how will my Toulon present itself?"
Passing between the companies that had been eating porridge and drinking
vodka a quarter of an hour before, he saw everywhere the same rapid
movement of soldiers forming ranks and getting their muskets ready, and on
all their faces he recognized the same eagerness that filled his heart. "It has
begun! Here it is, dreadful but enjoyable!" was what the face of each soldier
and each officer seemed to say.
Before he had reached the embankments that were being thrown up, he saw, in
the light of the dull autumn evening, mounted men coming toward him. The
foremost, wearing a Cossack cloak and lambskin cap and riding a white horse,
was Prince Bagration. Prince Andrew stopped, waiting for him to come up;
Prince Bagration reined in his horse and recognizing Prince Andrew nodded to
him. He still looked ahead while Prince Andrew told him what he had seen.
The feeling, "It has begun! Here it is!" was seen even on Prince Bagration's
hard brown face with its half-closed, dull, sleepy eyes. Prince Andrew gazed
with anxious curiosity at that impassive face and wished he could tell what, if
anything, this man was thinking and feeling at that moment. "Is there anything
at all behind that impassive face?" Prince Andrew asked himself as he looked.
Prince Bagration bent his head in sign of agreement with what Prince Andrew
told him, and said, "Very good!" in a tone that seemed to imply that everything
that took place and was reported to him was exactly what he had foreseen.
Prince Andrew, out of breath with his rapid ride, spoke quickly. Prince
Bagration, uttering his words with an Oriental accent, spoke particularly
slowly, as if to impress the fact that there was no need to hurry. However, he
put his horse to a trot in the direction of Tushin's battery. Prince Andrew
followed with the suite. Behind Prince Bagration rode an officer of the suite,
the prince's personal adjutant, Zherkov, an orderly officer, the staff officer on
duty, riding a fine bobtailed horse, and a civilian—an accountant who had
asked permission to be present at the battle out of curiosity. The accountant, a
stout, full-faced man, looked around him with a naive smile of satisfaction and
presented a strange appearance among the hussars, Cossacks, and adjutants, in
his camlet coat, as he jolted on his horse with a convoy officer's saddle.
"He wants to see a battle," said Zherkov to Bolkonski, pointing to the
accountant, "but he feels a pain in the pit of his stomach already."
"Oh, leave off!" said the accountant with a beaming but rather cunning smile,
as if flattered at being made the subject of Zherkov's joke, and purposely
trying to appear stupider than he really was.
"It is very strange, mon Monsieur Prince," said the staff officer. (He
remembered that in French there is some peculiar way of addressing a prince,
but could not get it quite right.)
By this time they were all approaching Tushin's battery, and a ball struck the
ground in front of them.
"What's that that has fallen?" asked the accountant with a naive smile.
"A French pancake," answered Zherkov.
"So that's what they hit with?" asked the accountant. "How awful!"
He seemed to swell with satisfaction. He had hardly finished speaking when
they again heard an unexpectedly violent whistling which suddenly ended with
a thud into something soft... f-f-flop! and a Cossack, riding a little to their right
and behind the accountant, crashed to earth with his horse. Zherkov and the
staff officer bent over their saddles and turned their horses away. The
accountant stopped, facing the Cossack, and examined him with attentive
curiosity. The Cossack was dead, but the horse still struggled.
Prince Bagration screwed up his eyes, looked round, and, seeing the cause of
the confusion, turned away with indifference, as if to say, "Is it worth while
noticing trifles?" He reined in his horse with the care of a skillful rider and,
slightly bending over, disengaged his saber which had caught in his cloak. It
was an old-fashioned saber of a kind no longer in general use. Prince Andrew
remembered the story of Suvorov giving his saber to Bagration in Italy, and
the recollection was particularly pleasant at that moment. They had reached
the battery at which Prince Andrew had been when he examined the
battlefield.
"Whose company?" asked Prince Bagration of an artilleryman standing by the
ammunition wagon.
He asked, "Whose company?" but he really meant, "Are you frightened here?"
and the artilleryman understood him.
"Captain Tushin's, your excellency!" shouted the red-haired, freckled gunner
in a merry voice, standing to attention.
"Yes, yes," muttered Bagration as if considering something, and he rode past
the limbers to the farthest cannon.
As he approached, a ringing shot issued from it deafening him and his suite,
and in the smoke that suddenly surrounded the gun they could see the gunners
who had seized it straining to roll it quickly back to its former position. A
huge, broad-shouldered gunner, Number One, holding a mop, his legs far
apart, sprang to the wheel; while Number Two with a trembling hand placed a
charge in the cannon's mouth. The short, round-shouldered Captain Tushin,
stumbling over the tail of the gun carriage, moved forward and, not noticing
the general, looked out shading his eyes with his small hand.
"Lift it two lines more and it will be just right," cried he in a feeble voice to
which he tried to impart a dashing note, ill-suited to his weak figure. "Number
Two!" he squeaked. "Fire, Medvedev!"
Bagration called to him, and Tushin, raising three fingers to his cap with a
bashful and awkward gesture not at all like a military salute but like a priest's
benediction, approached the general. Though Tushin's guns had been intended
to cannonade the valley, he was firing incendiary balls at the village of Schon
Grabern visible just opposite, in front of which large masses of French were
advancing.
No one had given Tushin orders where and at what to fire, but after consulting
his sergeant major, Zakharchenko, for whom he had great respect, he had
decided that it would be a good thing to set fire to the village. "Very good!"
said Bagration in reply to the officer's report, and began deliberately to
examine the whole battlefield extended before him. The French had advanced
nearest on our right. Below the height on which the Kiev regiment was
stationed, in the hollow where the rivulet flowed, the soul-stirring rolling and
crackling of musketry was heard, and much farther to the right beyond the
dragoons, the officer of the suite pointed out to Bagration a French column
that was outflanking us. To the left the horizon bounded by the adjacent wood.
Prince Bagration ordered two battalions from the center to be sent to reinforce
the right flank. The officer of the suite ventured to remark to the prince that if
these battalions went away, the guns would remain without support. Prince
Bagration turned to the officer and with his dull eyes looked at him in silence.
It seemed to Prince Andrew that the officer's remark was just and that really
no answer could be made to it. But at that moment an adjutant galloped up
with a message from the commander of the regiment in the hollow and news
that immense masses of the French were coming down upon them and that his
regiment was in disorder and was retreating upon the Kiev grenadiers. Prince
Bagration bowed his head in sign of assent and approval. He rode off at a walk
to the right and sent an adjutant to the dragoons with orders to attack the
French. But this adjutant returned half an hour later with the news that the
commander of the dragoons had already retreated beyond the dip in the
ground, as a heavy fire had been opened on him and he was losing men
uselessly, and so had hastened to throw some sharpshooters into the wood.
"Very good!" said Bagration.
As he was leaving the battery, firing was heard on the left also, and as it was
too far to the left flank for him to have time to go there himself, Prince
Bagration sent Zherkov to tell the general in command (the one who had
paraded his regiment before Kutuzov at Braunau) that he must retreat as
quickly as possible behind the hollow in the rear, as the right flank would
probably not be able to withstand the enemy's attack very long. About Tushin
and the battalion that had been in support of his battery all was forgotten.
Prince Andrew listened attentively to Bagration's colloquies with the
commanding officers and the orders he gave them and, to his surprise, found
that no orders were really given, but that Prince Bagration tried to make it
appear that everything done by necessity, by accident, or by the will of
subordinate commanders was done, if not by his direct command, at least in
accord with his intentions. Prince Andrew noticed, however, that though what
happened was due to chance and was independent of the commander's will,
owing to the tact Bagration showed, his presence was very valuable. Officers
who approached him with disturbed countenances became calm; soldiers and
officers greeted him gaily, grew more cheerful in his presence, and were
evidently anxious to display their courage before him.
CHAPTER XVIII
Prince Bagration, having reached the highest point of our right flank, began
riding downhill to where the roll of musketry was heard but where on account
of the smoke nothing could be seen. The nearer they got to the hollow the less
they could see but the more they felt the nearness of the actual battlefield.
They began to meet wounded men. One with a bleeding head and no cap was
being dragged along by two soldiers who supported him under the arms. There
was a gurgle in his throat and he was spitting blood. A bullet had evidently hit
him in the throat or mouth. Another was walking sturdily by himself but
without his musket, groaning aloud and swinging his arm which had just been
hurt, while blood from it was streaming over his greatcoat as from a bottle. He
had that moment been wounded and his face showed fear rather than suffering.
Crossing a road they descended a steep incline and saw several men lying on
the ground; they also met a crowd of soldiers some of whom were unwounded.
The soldiers were ascending the hill breathing heavily, and despite the
general's presence were talking loudly and gesticulating. In front of them rows
of gray cloaks were already visible through the smoke, and an officer catching
sight of Bagration rushed shouting after the crowd of retreating soldiers,
ordering them back. Bagration rode up to the ranks along which shots crackled
now here and now there, drowning the sound of voices and the shouts of
command. The whole air reeked with smoke. The excited faces of the soldiers
were blackened with it. Some were using their ramrods, others putting powder
on the touchpans or taking charges from their pouches, while others were
firing, though who they were firing at could not be seen for the smoke which
there was no wind to carry away. A pleasant humming and whistling of bullets
were often heard. "What is this?" thought Prince Andrew approaching the
crowd of soldiers. "It can't be an attack, for they are not moving; it can't be a
square—for they are not drawn up for that."
The commander of the regiment, a thin, feeble-looking old man with a
pleasant smile—his eyelids drooping more than half over his old eyes, giving
him a mild expression, rode up to Bagration and welcomed him as a host
welcomes an honored guest. He reported that his regiment had been attacked
by French cavalry and that, though the attack had been repulsed, he had lost
more than half his men. He said the attack had been repulsed, employing this
military term to describe what had occurred to his regiment, but in reality he
did not himself know what had happened during that half-hour to the troops
entrusted to him, and could not say with certainty whether the attack had been
repulsed or his regiment had been broken up. All he knew was that at the
commencement of the action balls and shells began flying all over his
regiment and hitting men and that afterwards someone had shouted "Cavalry!"
and our men had begun firing. They were still firing, not at the cavalry which
had disappeared, but at French infantry who had come into the hollow and
were firing at our men. Prince Bagration bowed his head as a sign that this was
exactly what he had desired and expected. Turning to his adjutant he ordered
him to bring down the two battalions of the Sixth Chasseurs whom they had
just passed. Prince Andrew was struck by the changed expression on Prince
Bagration's face at this moment. It expressed the concentrated and happy
resolution you see on the face of a man who on a hot day takes a final run
before plunging into the water. The dull, sleepy expression was no longer
there, nor the affectation of profound thought. The round, steady, hawk's eyes
looked before him eagerly and rather disdainfully, not resting on anything
although his movements were still slow and measured.
The commander of the regiment turned to Prince Bagration, entreating him to
go back as it was too dangerous to remain where they were. "Please, your
excellency, for God's sake!" he kept saying, glancing for support at an officer
of the suite who turned away from him. "There, you see!" and he drew
attention to the bullets whistling, singing, and hissing continually around
them. He spoke in the tone of entreaty and reproach that a carpenter uses to a
gentleman who has picked up an ax: "We are used to it, but you, sir, will
blister your hands." He spoke as if those bullets could not kill him, and his
half-closed eyes gave still more persuasiveness to his words. The staff officer
joined in the colonel's appeals, but Bagration did not reply; he only gave an
order to cease firing and re-form, so as to give room for the two approaching
battalions. While he was speaking, the curtain of smoke that had concealed the
hollow, driven by a rising wind, began to move from right to left as if drawn
by an invisible hand, and the hill opposite, with the French moving about on it,
opened out before them. All eyes fastened involuntarily on this French column
advancing against them and winding down over the uneven ground. One could
already see the soldiers' shaggy caps, distinguish the officers from the men,
and see the standard flapping against its staff.
"They march splendidly," remarked someone in Bagration's suite.
The head of the column had already descended into the hollow. The clash
would take place on this side of it...
The remains of our regiment which had been in action rapidly formed up and
moved to the right; from behind it, dispersing the laggards, came two
battalions of the Sixth Chasseurs in fine order. Before they had reached
Bagration, the weighty tread of the mass of men marching in step could be
heard. On their left flank, nearest to Bagration, marched a company
commander, a fine round-faced man, with a stupid and happy expression—the
same man who had rushed out of the wattle shed. At that moment he was
clearly thinking of nothing but how dashing a fellow he would appear as he
passed the commander.
With the self-satisfaction of a man on parade, he stepped lightly with his
muscular legs as if sailing along, stretching himself to his full height without
the smallest effort, his ease contrasting with the heavy tread of the soldiers
who were keeping step with him. He carried close to his leg a narrow
unsheathed sword (small, curved, and not like a real weapon) and looked now
at the superior officers and now back at the men without losing step, his whole
powerful body turning flexibly. It was as if all the powers of his soul were
concentrated on passing the commander in the best possible manner, and
feeling that he was doing it well he was happy. "Left... left... left..." he seemed
to repeat to himself at each alternate step; and in time to this, with stern but
varied faces, the wall of soldiers burdened with knapsacks and muskets
marched in step, and each one of these hundreds of soldiers seemed to be
repeating to himself at each alternate step, "Left... left... left..." A fat major
skirted a bush, puffing and falling out of step; a soldier who had fallen behind,
his face showing alarm at his defection, ran at a trot, panting to catch up with
his company. A cannon ball, cleaving the air, flew over the heads of Bagration
and his suite, and fell into the column to the measure of "Left... left!" "Close
up!" came the company commander's voice in jaunty tones. The soldiers
passed in a semicircle round something where the ball had fallen, and an old
trooper on the flank, a noncommissioned officer who had stopped beside the
dead men, ran to catch up his line and, falling into step with a hop, looked
back angrily, and through the ominous silence and the regular tramp of feet
beating the ground in unison, one seemed to hear left... left... left.
"Well done, lads!" said Prince Bagration.
"Glad to do our best, your ex'len-lency!" came a confused shout from the
ranks. A morose soldier marching on the left turned his eyes on Bagration as
he shouted, with an expression that seemed to say: "We know that ourselves!"
Another, without looking round, as though fearing to relax, shouted with his
mouth wide open and passed on.
The order was given to halt and down knapsacks.
Bagration rode round the ranks that had marched past him and dismounted. He
gave the reins to a Cossack, took off and handed over his felt coat, stretched
his legs, and set his cap straight. The head of the French column, with its
officers leading, appeared from below the hill.
"Forward, with God!" said Bagration, in a resolute, sonorous voice, turning for
a moment to the front line, and slightly swinging his arms, he went forward
uneasily over the rough field with the awkward gait of a cavalryman. Prince
Andrew felt that an invisible power was leading him forward, and experienced
great happiness.
The French were already near. Prince Andrew, walking beside Bagration,
could clearly distinguish their bandoliers, red epaulets, and even their faces.
(He distinctly saw an old French officer who, with gaitered legs and turned-out
toes, climbed the hill with difficulty.) Prince Bagration gave no further orders
and silently continued to walk on in front of the ranks. Suddenly one shot after
another rang out from the French, smoke appeared all along their uneven
ranks, and musket shots sounded. Several of our men fell, among them the
round-faced officer who had marched so gaily and complacently. But at the
moment the first report was heard, Bagration looked round and shouted,
"Hurrah!"
"Hurrah—ah!—ah!" rang a long-drawn shout from our ranks, and passing
Bagration and racing one another they rushed in an irregular but joyous and
eager crowd down the hill at their disordered foe.
CHAPTER XIX
The attack of the Sixth Chasseurs secured the retreat of our right flank. In the
center Tushin's forgotten battery, which had managed to set fire to the Schon
Grabern village, delayed the French advance. The French were putting out the
fire which the wind was spreading, and thus gave us time to retreat. The
retirement of the center to the other side of the dip in the ground at the rear
was hurried and noisy, but the different companies did not get mixed. But our
left—which consisted of the Azov and Podolsk infantry and the Pavlograd
hussars—was simultaneously attacked and outflanked by superior French
forces under Lannes and was thrown into confusion. Bagration had sent
Zherkov to the general commanding that left flank with orders to retreat
immediately.
Zherkov, not removing his hand from his cap, turned his horse about and
galloped off. But no sooner had he left Bagration than his courage failed him.
He was seized by panic and could not go where it was dangerous.
Having reached the left flank, instead of going to the front where the firing
was, he began to look for the general and his staff where they could not
possibly be, and so did not deliver the order.
The command of the left flank belonged by seniority to the commander of the
regiment Kutuzov had reviewed at Braunau and in which Dolokhov was
serving as a private. But the command of the extreme left flank had been
assigned to the commander of the Pavlograd regiment in which Rostov was
serving, and a misunderstanding arose. The two commanders were much
exasperated with one another and, long after the action had begun on the right
flank and the French were already advancing, were engaged in discussion with
the sole object of offending one another. But the regiments, both cavalry and
infantry, were by no means ready for the impending action. From privates to
general they were not expecting a battle and were engaged in peaceful
occupations, the cavalry feeding the horses and the infantry collecting wood.
"He higher iss dan I in rank," said the German colonel of the hussars, flushing
and addressing an adjutant who had ridden up, "so let him do what he vill, but
I cannot sacrifice my hussars... Bugler, sount ze retreat!"
But haste was becoming imperative. Cannon and musketry, mingling together,
thundered on the right and in the center, while the capotes of Lannes'
sharpshooters were already seen crossing the milldam and forming up within
twice the range of a musket shot. The general in command of the infantry went
toward his horse with jerky steps, and having mounted drew himself up very
straight and tall and rode to the Pavlograd commander. The commanders met
with polite bows but with secret malevolence in their hearts.
"Once again, Colonel," said the general, "I can't leave half my men in the
wood. I beg of you, I beg of you," he repeated, "to occupy the position and
prepare for an attack."
"I peg of you yourself not to mix in vot is not your business!" suddenly replied
the irate colonel. "If you vere in the cavalry..."
"I am not in the cavalry, Colonel, but I am a Russian general and if you are not
aware of the fact..."
"Quite avare, your excellency," suddenly shouted the colonel, touching his
horse and turning purple in the face. "Vill you be so goot to come to ze front
and see dat zis position iss no goot? I don't vish to destroy my men for your
pleasure!"
"You forget yourself, Colonel. I am not considering my own pleasure and I
won't allow it to be said!"
Taking the colonel's outburst as a challenge to his courage, the general
expanded his chest and rode, frowning, beside him to the front line, as if their
differences would be settled there amongst the bullets. They reached the front,
several bullets sped over them, and they halted in silence. There was nothing
fresh to be seen from the line, for from where they had been before it had been
evident that it was impossible for cavalry to act among the bushes and broken
ground, as well as that the French were outflanking our left. The general and
colonel looked sternly and significantly at one another like two fighting cocks
preparing for battle, each vainly trying to detect signs of cowardice in the
other. Both passed the examination successfully. As there was nothing to be
said, and neither wished to give occasion for it to be alleged that he had been
the first to leave the range of fire, they would have remained there for a long
time testing each other's courage had it not been that just then they heard the
rattle of musketry and a muffled shout almost behind them in the wood. The
French had attacked the men collecting wood in the copse. It was no longer
possible for the hussars to retreat with the infantry. They were cut off from the
line of retreat on the left by the French. However inconvenient the position, it
was now necessary to attack in order to cut a way through for themselves.
The squadron in which Rostov was serving had scarcely time to mount before
it was halted facing the enemy. Again, as at the Enns bridge, there was nothing
between the squadron and the enemy, and again that terrible dividing line of
uncertainty and fear—resembling the line separating the living from the dead
—lay between them. All were conscious of this unseen line, and the question
whether they would cross it or not, and how they would cross it, agitated them
all.
The colonel rode to the front, angrily gave some reply to questions put to him
by the officers, and, like a man desperately insisting on having his own way,
gave an order. No one said anything definite, but the rumor of an attack spread
through the squadron. The command to form up rang out and the sabers
whizzed as they were drawn from their scabbards. Still no one moved. The
troops of the left flank, infantry and hussars alike, felt that the commander did
not himself know what to do, and this irresolution communicated itself to the
men.
"If only they would be quick!" thought Rostov, feeling that at last the time had
come to experience the joy of an attack of which he had so often heard from
his fellow hussars.
"Fo'ward, with God, lads!" rang out Denisov's voice. "At a twot fo'ward!"
The horses' croups began to sway in the front line. Rook pulled at the reins
and started of his own accord.
Before him, on the right, Rostov saw the front lines of his hussars and still
farther ahead a dark line which he could not see distinctly but took to be the
enemy. Shots could be heard, but some way off.
"Faster!" came the word of command, and Rostov felt Rook's flanks drooping
as he broke into a gallop.
Rostov anticipated his horse's movements and became more and more elated.
He had noticed a solitary tree ahead of him. This tree had been in the middle
of the line that had seemed so terrible—and now he had crossed that line and
not only was there nothing terrible, but everything was becoming more and
more happy and animated. "Oh, how I will slash at him!" thought Rostov,
gripping the hilt of his saber.
"Hur-a-a-a-ah!" came a roar of voices. "Let anyone come my way now,"
thought Rostov driving his spurs into Rook and letting him go at a full gallop
so that he outstripped the others. Ahead, the enemy was already visible.
Suddenly something like a birch broom seemed to sweep over the squadron.
Rostov raised his saber, ready to strike, but at that instant the trooper
Nikitenko, who was galloping ahead, shot away from him, and Rostov felt as
in a dream that he continued to be carried forward with unnatural speed but yet
stayed on the same spot. From behind him Bondarchuk, an hussar he knew,
jolted against him and looked angrily at him. Bondarchuk's horse swerved and
galloped past.
"How is it I am not moving? I have fallen, I am killed!" Rostov asked and
answered at the same instant. He was alone in the middle of a field. Instead of
the moving horses and hussars' backs, he saw nothing before him but the
motionless earth and the stubble around him. There was warm blood under his
arm. "No, I am wounded and the horse is killed." Rook tried to rise on his
forelegs but fell back, pinning his rider's leg. Blood was flowing from his
head; he struggled but could not rise. Rostov also tried to rise but fell back, his
sabretache having become entangled in the saddle. Where our men were, and
where the French, he did not know. There was no one near.
Having disentangled his leg, he rose. "Where, on which side, was now the line
that had so sharply divided the two armies?" he asked himself and could not
answer. "Can something bad have happened to me?" he wondered as he got
up: and at that moment he felt that something superfluous was hanging on his
benumbed left arm. The wrist felt as if it were not his. He examined his hand
carefully, vainly trying to find blood on it. "Ah, here are people coming," he
thought joyfully, seeing some men running toward him. "They will help me!"
In front came a man wearing a strange shako and a blue cloak, swarthy,
sunburned, and with a hooked nose. Then came two more, and many more
running behind. One of them said something strange, not in Russian. In among
the hindmost of these men wearing similar shakos was a Russian hussar. He
was being held by the arms and his horse was being led behind him.
"It must be one of ours, a prisoner. Yes. Can it be that they will take me too?
Who are these men?" thought Rostov, scarcely believing his eyes. "Can they
be French?" He looked at the approaching Frenchmen, and though but a
moment before he had been galloping to get at them and hack them to pieces,
their proximity now seemed so awful that he could not believe his eyes. "Who
are they? Why are they running? Can they be coming at me? And why? To kill
me? Me whom everyone is so fond of?" He remembered his mother's love for
him, and his family's, and his friends', and the enemy's intention to kill him
seemed impossible. "But perhaps they may do it!" For more than ten seconds
he stood not moving from the spot or realizing the situation. The foremost
Frenchman, the one with the hooked nose, was already so close that the
expression of his face could be seen. And the excited, alien face of that man,
his bayonet hanging down, holding his breath, and running so lightly,
frightened Rostov. He seized his pistol and, instead of firing it, flung it at the
Frenchman and ran with all his might toward the bushes. He did not now run
with the feeling of doubt and conflict with which he had trodden the Enns
bridge, but with the feeling of a hare fleeing from the hounds. One single
sentiment, that of fear for his young and happy life, possessed his whole being.
Rapidly leaping the furrows, he fled across the field with the impetuosity he
used to show at catchplay, now and then turning his good-natured, pale, young
face to look back. A shudder of terror went through him: "No, better not look,"
he thought, but having reached the bushes he glanced round once more. The
French had fallen behind, and just as he looked round the first man changed
his run to a walk and, turning, shouted something loudly to a comrade farther
back. Rostov paused. "No, there's some mistake," thought he. "They can't have
wanted to kill me." But at the same time, his left arm felt as heavy as if a
seventy-pound weight were tied to it. He could run no more. The Frenchman
also stopped and took aim. Rostov closed his eyes and stooped down. One
bullet and then another whistled past him. He mustered his last remaining
strength, took hold of his left hand with his right, and reached the bushes.
Behind these were some Russian sharpshooters.
CHAPTER XX
The infantry regiments that had been caught unawares in the outskirts of the
wood ran out of it, the different companies getting mixed, and retreated as a
disorderly crowd. One soldier, in his fear, uttered the senseless cry, "Cut off!"
that is so terrible in battle, and that word infected the whole crowd with a
feeling of panic.
"Surrounded! Cut off? We're lost!" shouted the fugitives.
The moment he heard the firing and the cry from behind, the general realized
that something dreadful had happened to his regiment, and the thought that he,
an exemplary officer of many years' service who had never been to blame,
might be held responsible at headquarters for negligence or inefficiency so
staggered him that, forgetting the recalcitrant cavalry colonel, his own dignity
as a general, and above all quite forgetting the danger and all regard for selfpreservation, he clutched the crupper of his saddle and, spurring his horse,
galloped to the regiment under a hail of bullets which fell around, but
fortunately missed him. His one desire was to know what was happening and
at any cost correct, or remedy, the mistake if he had made one, so that he, an
exemplary officer of twenty-two years' service, who had never been censured,
should not be held to blame.
Having galloped safely through the French, he reached a field behind the
copse across which our men, regardless of orders, were running and
descending the valley. That moment of moral hesitation which decides the fate
of battles had arrived. Would this disorderly crowd of soldiers attend to the
voice of their commander, or would they, disregarding him, continue their
flight? Despite his desperate shouts that used to seem so terrible to the
soldiers, despite his furious purple countenance distorted out of all likeness to
his former self, and the flourishing of his saber, the soldiers all continued to
run, talking, firing into the air, and disobeying orders. The moral hesitation
which decided the fate of battles was evidently culminating in a panic.
The general had a fit of coughing as a result of shouting and of the powder
smoke and stopped in despair. Everything seemed lost. But at that moment the
French who were attacking, suddenly and without any apparent reason, ran
back and disappeared from the outskirts, and Russian sharpshooters showed
themselves in the copse. It was Timokhin's company, which alone had
maintained its order in the wood and, having lain in ambush in a ditch, now
attacked the French unexpectedly. Timokhin, armed only with a sword, had
rushed at the enemy with such a desperate cry and such mad, drunken
determination that, taken by surprise, the French had thrown down their
muskets and run. Dolokhov, running beside Timokhin, killed a Frenchman at
close quarters and was the first to seize the surrendering French officer by his
collar. Our fugitives returned, the battalions re-formed, and the French who
had nearly cut our left flank in half were for the moment repulsed. Our reserve
units were able to join up, and the fight was at an end. The regimental
commander and Major Ekonomov had stopped beside a bridge, letting the
retreating companies pass by them, when a soldier came up and took hold of
the commander's stirrup, almost leaning against him. The man was wearing a
bluish coat of broadcloth, he had no knapsack or cap, his head was bandaged,
and over his shoulder a French munition pouch was slung. He had an officer's
sword in his hand. The soldier was pale, his blue eyes looked impudently into
the commander's face, and his lips were smiling. Though the commander was
occupied in giving instructions to Major Ekonomov, he could not help taking
notice of the soldier.
"Your excellency, here are two trophies," said Dolokhov, pointing to the
French sword and pouch. "I have taken an officer prisoner. I stopped the
company." Dolokhov breathed heavily from weariness and spoke in abrupt
sentences. "The whole company can bear witness. I beg you will remember
this, your excellency!"
"All right, all right," replied the commander, and turned to Major Ekonomov.
But Dolokhov did not go away; he untied the handkerchief around his head,
pulled it off, and showed the blood congealed on his hair.
"A bayonet wound. I remained at the front. Remember, your excellency!"
Tushin's battery had been forgotten and only at the very end of the action did
Prince Bagration, still hearing the cannonade in the center, send his orderly
staff officer, and later Prince Andrew also, to order the battery to retire as
quickly as possible. When the supports attached to Tushin's battery had been
moved away in the middle of the action by someone's order, the battery had
continued firing and was only not captured by the French because the enemy
could not surmise that anyone could have the effrontery to continue firing
from four quite undefended guns. On the contrary, the energetic action of that
battery led the French to suppose that here—in the center—the main Russian
forces were concentrated. Twice they had attempted to attack this point, but on
each occasion had been driven back by grapeshot from the four isolated guns
on the hillock.
Soon after Prince Bagration had left him, Tushin had succeeded in setting fire
to Schon Grabern.
"Look at them scurrying! It's burning! Just see the smoke! Fine! Grand! Look
at the smoke, the smoke!" exclaimed the artillerymen, brightening up.
All the guns, without waiting for orders, were being fired in the direction of
the conflagration. As if urging each other on, the soldiers cried at each shot:
"Fine! That's good! Look at it... Grand!" The fire, fanned by the breeze, was
rapidly spreading. The French columns that had advanced beyond the village
went back; but as though in revenge for this failure, the enemy placed ten guns
to the right of the village and began firing them at Tushin's battery.
In their childlike glee, aroused by the fire and their luck in successfully
cannonading the French, our artillerymen only noticed this battery when two
balls, and then four more, fell among our guns, one knocking over two horses
and another tearing off a munition-wagon driver's leg. Their spirits once
roused were, however, not diminished, but only changed character. The horses
were replaced by others from a reserve gun carriage, the wounded were
carried away, and the four guns were turned against the ten-gun battery.
Tushin's companion officer had been killed at the beginning of the engagement
and within an hour seventeen of the forty men of the guns' crews had been
disabled, but the artillerymen were still as merry and lively as ever. Twice they
noticed the French appearing below them, and then they fired grapeshot at
them.
Little Tushin, moving feebly and awkwardly, kept telling his orderly to "refill
my pipe for that one!" and then, scattering sparks from it, ran forward shading
his eyes with his small hand to look at the French.
"Smack at 'em, lads!" he kept saying, seizing the guns by the wheels and
working the screws himself.
Amid the smoke, deafened by the incessant reports which always made him
jump, Tushin not taking his pipe from his mouth ran from gun to gun, now
aiming, now counting the charges, now giving orders about replacing dead or
wounded horses and harnessing fresh ones, and shouting in his feeble voice, so
high pitched and irresolute. His face grew more and more animated. Only
when a man was killed or wounded did he frown and turn away from the sight,
shouting angrily at the men who, as is always the case, hesitated about lifting
the injured or dead. The soldiers, for the most part handsome fellows and, as is
always the case in an artillery company, a head and shoulders taller and twice
as broad as their officer—all looked at their commander like children in an
embarrassing situation, and the expression on his face was invariably reflected
on theirs.
Owing to the terrible uproar and the necessity for concentration and activity,
Tushin did not experience the slightest unpleasant sense of fear, and the
thought that he might be killed or badly wounded never occurred to him. On
the contrary, he became more and more elated. It seemed to him that it was a
very long time ago, almost a day, since he had first seen the enemy and fired
the first shot, and that the corner of the field he stood on was well-known and
familiar ground. Though he thought of everything, considered everything, and
did everything the best of officers could do in his position, he was in a state
akin to feverish delirium or drunkenness.
From the deafening sounds of his own guns around him, the whistle and thud
of the enemy's cannon balls, from the flushed and perspiring faces of the crew
bustling round the guns, from the sight of the blood of men and horses, from
the little puffs of smoke on the enemy's side (always followed by a ball flying
past and striking the earth, a man, a gun, a horse), from the sight of all these
things a fantastic world of his own had taken possession of his brain and at
that moment afforded him pleasure. The enemy's guns were in his fancy not
guns but pipes from which occasional puffs were blown by an invisible
smoker.
"There... he's puffing again," muttered Tushin to himself, as a small cloud rose
from the hill and was borne in a streak to the left by the wind.
"Now look out for the ball... we'll throw it back."
"What do you want, your honor?" asked an artilleryman, standing close by,
who heard him muttering.
"Nothing... only a shell..." he answered.
"Come along, our Matvevna!" he said to himself. "Matvevna" * was the name
his fancy gave to the farthest gun of the battery, which was large and of an old
pattern. The French swarming round their guns seemed to him like ants. In
that world, the handsome drunkard Number One of the second gun's crew was
"uncle"; Tushin looked at him more often than at anyone else and took delight
in his every movement. The sound of musketry at the foot of the hill, now
diminishing, now increasing, seemed like someone's breathing. He listened
intently to the ebb and flow of these sounds.
* Daughter of Matthew.
"Ah! Breathing again, breathing!" he muttered to himself.
He imagined himself as an enormously tall, powerful man who was throwing
cannon balls at the French with both hands.
"Now then, Matvevna, dear old lady, don't let me down!" he was saying as he
moved from the gun, when a strange, unfamiliar voice called above his head:
"Captain Tushin! Captain!"
Tushin turned round in dismay. It was the staff officer who had turned him out
of the booth at Grunth. He was shouting in a gasping voice:
"Are you mad? You have twice been ordered to retreat, and you..."
"Why are they down on me?" thought Tushin, looking in alarm at his superior.
"I... don't..." he muttered, holding up two fingers to his cap. "I..."
But the staff officer did not finish what he wanted to say. A cannon ball, flying
close to him, caused him to duck and bend over his horse. He paused, and just
as he was about to say something more, another ball stopped him. He turned
his horse and galloped off.
"Retire! All to retire!" he shouted from a distance.
The soldiers laughed. A moment later, an adjutant arrived with the same order.
It was Prince Andrew. The first thing he saw on riding up to the space where
Tushin's guns were stationed was an unharnessed horse with a broken leg, that
lay screaming piteously beside the harnessed horses. Blood was gushing from
its leg as from a spring. Among the limbers lay several dead men. One ball
after another passed over as he approached and he felt a nervous shudder run
down his spine. But the mere thought of being afraid roused him again. "I
cannot be afraid," thought he, and dismounted slowly among the guns. He
delivered the order and did not leave the battery. He decided to have the guns
removed from their positions and withdrawn in his presence. Together with
Tushin, stepping across the bodies and under a terrible fire from the French, he
attended to the removal of the guns.
"A staff officer was here a minute ago, but skipped off," said an artilleryman to
Prince Andrew. "Not like your honor!"
Prince Andrew said nothing to Tushin. They were both so busy as to seem not
to notice one another. When having limbered up the only two cannon that
remained uninjured out of the four, they began moving down the hill (one
shattered gun and one unicorn were left behind), Prince Andrew rode up to
Tushin.
"Well, till we meet again..." he said, holding out his hand to Tushin.
"Good-bye, my dear fellow," said Tushin. "Dear soul! Good-bye, my dear
fellow!" and for some unknown reason tears suddenly filled his eyes.
CHAPTER XXI
The wind had fallen and black clouds, merging with the powder smoke, hung
low over the field of battle on the horizon. It was growing dark and the glow
of two conflagrations was the more conspicuous. The cannonade was dying
down, but the rattle of musketry behind and on the right sounded oftener and
nearer. As soon as Tushin with his guns, continually driving round or coming
upon wounded men, was out of range of fire and had descended into the dip,
he was met by some of the staff, among them the staff officer and Zherkov,
who had been twice sent to Tushin's battery but had never reached it.
Interrupting one another, they all gave, and transmitted, orders as to how to
proceed, reprimanding and reproaching him. Tushin gave no orders, and,
silently—fearing to speak because at every word he felt ready to weep without
knowing why—rode behind on his artillery nag. Though the orders were to
abandon the wounded, many of them dragged themselves after troops and
begged for seats on the gun carriages. The jaunty infantry officer who just
before the battle had rushed out of Tushin's wattle shed was laid, with a bullet
in his stomach, on "Matvevna's" carriage. At the foot of the hill, a pale hussar
cadet, supporting one hand with the other, came up to Tushin and asked for a
seat.
"Captain, for God's sake! I've hurt my arm," he said timidly. "For God's sake...
I can't walk. For God's sake!"
It was plain that this cadet had already repeatedly asked for a lift and been
refused. He asked in a hesitating, piteous voice.
"Tell them to give me a seat, for God's sake!"
"Give him a seat," said Tushin. "Lay a cloak for him to sit on, lad," he said,
addressing his favorite soldier. "And where is the wounded officer?"
"He has been set down. He died," replied someone.
"Help him up. Sit down, dear fellow, sit down! Spread out the cloak,
Antonov."
The cadet was Rostov. With one hand he supported the other; he was pale and
his jaw trembled, shivering feverishly. He was placed on "Matvevna," the gun
from which they had removed the dead officer. The cloak they spread under
him was wet with blood which stained his breeches and arm.
"What, are you wounded, my lad?" said Tushin, approaching the gun on which
Rostov sat.
"No, it's a sprain."
"Then what is this blood on the gun carriage?" inquired Tushin.
"It was the officer, your honor, stained it," answered the artilleryman, wiping
away the blood with his coat sleeve, as if apologizing for the state of his gun.
It was all that they could do to get the guns up the rise aided by the infantry,
and having reached the village of Gruntersdorf they halted. It had grown so
dark that one could not distinguish the uniforms ten paces off, and the firing
had begun to subside. Suddenly, near by on the right, shouting and firing were
again heard. Flashes of shot gleamed in the darkness. This was the last French
attack and was met by soldiers who had sheltered in the village houses. They
all rushed out of the village again, but Tushin's guns could not move, and the
artillerymen, Tushin, and the cadet exchanged silent glances as they awaited
their fate. The firing died down and soldiers, talking eagerly, streamed out of a
side street.
"Not hurt, Petrov?" asked one.
"We've given it 'em hot, mate! They won't make another push now," said
another.
"You couldn't see a thing. How they shot at their own fellows! Nothing could
be seen. Pitch-dark, brother! Isn't there something to drink?"
The French had been repulsed for the last time. And again and again in the
complete darkness Tushin's guns moved forward, surrounded by the humming
infantry as by a frame.
In the darkness, it seemed as though a gloomy unseen river was flowing
always in one direction, humming with whispers and talk and the sound of
hoofs and wheels. Amid the general rumble, the groans and voices of the
wounded were more distinctly heard than any other sound in the darkness of
the night. The gloom that enveloped the army was filled with their groans,
which seemed to melt into one with the darkness of the night. After a while the
moving mass became agitated, someone rode past on a white horse followed
by his suite, and said something in passing: "What did he say? Where to, now?
Halt, is it? Did he thank us?" came eager questions from all sides. The whole
moving mass began pressing closer together and a report spread that they were
ordered to halt: evidently those in front had halted. All remained where they
were in the middle of the muddy road.
Fires were lighted and the talk became more audible. Captain Tushin, having
given orders to his company, sent a soldier to find a dressing station or a
doctor for the cadet, and sat down by a bonfire the soldiers had kindled on the
road. Rostov, too, dragged himself to the fire. From pain, cold, and damp, a
feverish shivering shook his whole body. Drowsiness was irresistibly
mastering him, but he kept awake by an excruciating pain in his arm, for
which he could find no satisfactory position. He kept closing his eyes and then
again looking at the fire, which seemed to him dazzlingly red, and at the
feeble, round-shouldered figure of Tushin who was sitting cross-legged like a
Turk beside him. Tushin's large, kind, intelligent eyes were fixed with
sympathy and commiseration on Rostov, who saw that Tushin with his whole
heart wished to help him but could not.
From all sides were heard the footsteps and talk of the infantry, who were
walking, driving past, and settling down all around. The sound of voices, the
tramping feet, the horses' hoofs moving in mud, the crackling of wood fires
near and afar, merged into one tremulous rumble.
It was no longer, as before, a dark, unseen river flowing through the gloom,
but a dark sea swelling and gradually subsiding after a storm. Rostov looked at
and listened listlessly to what passed before and around him. An infantryman
came to the fire, squatted on his heels, held his hands to the blaze, and turned
away his face.
"You don't mind your honor?" he asked Tushin. "I've lost my company, your
honor. I don't know where... such bad luck!"
With the soldier, an infantry officer with a bandaged cheek came up to the
bonfire, and addressing Tushin asked him to have the guns moved a trifle to let
a wagon go past. After he had gone, two soldiers rushed to the campfire. They
were quarreling and fighting desperately, each trying to snatch from the other
a boot they were both holding on to.
"You picked it up?... I dare say! You're very smart!" one of them shouted
hoarsely.
Then a thin, pale soldier, his neck bandaged with a bloodstained leg band,
came up and in angry tones asked the artillerymen for water.
"Must one die like a dog?" said he.
Tushin told them to give the man some water. Then a cheerful soldier ran up,
begging a little fire for the infantry.
"A nice little hot torch for the infantry! Good luck to you, fellow countrymen.
Thanks for the fire—we'll return it with interest," said he, carrying away into
the darkness a glowing stick.
Next came four soldiers, carrying something heavy on a cloak, and passed by
the fire. One of them stumbled.
"Who the devil has put the logs on the road?" snarled he.
"He's dead—why carry him?" said another.
"Shut up!"
And they disappeared into the darkness with their load.
"Still aching?" Tushin asked Rostov in a whisper.
"Yes."
"Your honor, you're wanted by the general. He is in the hut here," said a
gunner, coming up to Tushin.
"Coming, friend."
Tushin rose and, buttoning his greatcoat and pulling it straight, walked away
from the fire.
Not far from the artillery campfire, in a hut that had been prepared for him,
Prince Bagration sat at dinner, talking with some commanding officers who
had gathered at his quarters. The little old man with the half-closed eyes was
there greedily gnawing a mutton bone, and the general who had served
blamelessly for twenty-two years, flushed by a glass of vodka and the dinner;
and the staff officer with the signet ring, and Zherkov, uneasily glancing at
them all, and Prince Andrew, pale, with compressed lips and feverishly
glittering eyes.
In a corner of the hut stood a standard captured from the French, and the
accountant with the naive face was feeling its texture, shaking his head in
perplexity—perhaps because the banner really interested him, perhaps because
it was hard for him, hungry as he was, to look on at a dinner where there was
no place for him. In the next hut there was a French colonel who had been
taken prisoner by our dragoons. Our officers were flocking in to look at him.
Prince Bagration was thanking the individual commanders and inquiring into
details of the action and our losses. The general whose regiment had been
inspected at Braunau was informing the prince that as soon as the action began
he had withdrawn from the wood, mustered the men who were woodcutting,
and, allowing the French to pass him, had made a bayonet charge with two
battalions and had broken up the French troops.
"When I saw, your excellency, that their first battalion was disorganized, I
stopped in the road and thought: 'I'll let them come on and will meet them with
the fire of the whole battalion'—and that's what I did."
The general had so wished to do this and was so sorry he had not managed to
do it that it seemed to him as if it had really happened. Perhaps it might really
have been so? Could one possibly make out amid all that confusion what did
or did not happen?
"By the way, your excellency, I should inform you," he continued—
remembering Dolokhov's conversation with Kutuzov and his last interview
with the gentleman-ranker—"that Private Dolokhov, who was reduced to the
ranks, took a French officer prisoner in my presence and particularly
distinguished himself."
"I saw the Pavlograd hussars attack there, your excellency," chimed in
Zherkov, looking uneasily around. He had not seen the hussars all that day, but
had heard about them from an infantry officer. "They broke up two squares,
your excellency."
Several of those present smiled at Zherkov's words, expecting one of his usual
jokes, but noticing that what he was saying redounded to the glory of our arms
and of the day's work, they assumed a serious expression, though many of
them knew that what he was saying was a lie devoid of any foundation. Prince
Bagration turned to the old colonel:
"Gentlemen, I thank you all; all arms have behaved heroically: infantry,
cavalry, and artillery. How was it that two guns were abandoned in the
center?" he inquired, searching with his eyes for someone. (Prince Bagration
did not ask about the guns on the left flank; he knew that all the guns there had
been abandoned at the very beginning of the action.) "I think I sent you?" he
added, turning to the staff officer on duty.
"One was damaged," answered the staff officer, "and the other I can't
understand. I was there all the time giving orders and had only just left.... It is
true that it was hot there," he added, modestly.
Someone mentioned that Captain Tushin was bivouacking close to the village
and had already been sent for.
"Oh, but you were there?" said Prince Bagration, addressing Prince Andrew.
"Of course, we only just missed one another," said the staff officer, with a
smile to Bolkonski.
"I had not the pleasure of seeing you," said Prince Andrew, coldly and
abruptly.
All were silent. Tushin appeared at the threshold and made his way timidly
from behind the backs of the generals. As he stepped past the generals in the
crowded hut, feeling embarrassed as he always was by the sight of his
superiors, he did not notice the staff of the banner and stumbled over it.
Several of those present laughed.
"How was it a gun was abandoned?" asked Bagration, frowning, not so much
at the captain as at those who were laughing, among whom Zherkov laughed
loudest.
Only now, when he was confronted by the stern authorities, did his guilt and
the disgrace of having lost two guns and yet remaining alive present
themselves to Tushin in all their horror. He had been so excited that he had not
thought about it until that moment. The officers' laughter confused him still
more. He stood before Bagration with his lower jaw trembling and was hardly
able to mutter: "I don't know... your excellency... I had no men... your
excellency."
"You might have taken some from the covering troops."
Tushin did not say that there were no covering troops, though that was
perfectly true. He was afraid of getting some other officer into trouble, and
silently fixed his eyes on Bagration as a schoolboy who has blundered looks at
an examiner.
The silence lasted some time. Prince Bagration, apparently not wishing to be
severe, found nothing to say; the others did not venture to intervene. Prince
Andrew looked at Tushin from under his brows and his fingers twitched
nervously.
"Your excellency!" Prince Andrew broke the silence with his abrupt voice,
"you were pleased to send me to Captain Tushin's battery. I went there and
found two thirds of the men and horses knocked out, two guns smashed, and
no supports at all."
Prince Bagration and Tushin looked with equal intentness at Bolkonski, who
spoke with suppressed agitation.
"And, if your excellency will allow me to express my opinion," he continued,
"we owe today's success chiefly to the action of that battery and the heroic
endurance of Captain Tushin and his company," and without awaiting a reply,
Prince Andrew rose and left the table.
Prince Bagration looked at Tushin, evidently reluctant to show distrust in
Bolkonski's emphatic opinion yet not feeling able fully to credit it, bent his
head, and told Tushin that he could go. Prince Andrew went out with him.
"Thank you; you saved me, my dear fellow!" said Tushin.
Prince Andrew gave him a look, but said nothing and went away. He felt sad
and depressed. It was all so strange, so unlike what he had hoped.
"Who are they? Why are they here? What do they want? And when will all
this end?" thought Rostov, looking at the changing shadows before him. The
pain in his arm became more and more intense. Irresistible drowsiness
overpowered him, red rings danced before his eyes, and the impression of
those voices and faces and a sense of loneliness merged with the physical pain.
It was they, these soldiers—wounded and unwounded—it was they who were
crushing, weighing down, and twisting the sinews and scorching the flesh of
his sprained arm and shoulder. To rid himself of them he closed his eyes.
For a moment he dozed, but in that short interval innumerable things appeared
to him in a dream: his mother and her large white hand, Sonya's thin little
shoulders, Natasha's eyes and laughter, Denisov with his voice and mustache,
and Telyanin and all that affair with Telyanin and Bogdanich. That affair was
the same thing as this soldier with the harsh voice, and it was that affair and
this soldier that were so agonizingly, incessantly pulling and pressing his arm
and always dragging it in one direction. He tried to get away from them, but
they would not for an instant let his shoulder move a hair's breadth. It would
not ache—it would be well—if only they did not pull it, but it was impossible
to get rid of them.
He opened his eyes and looked up. The black canopy of night hung less than a
yard above the glow of the charcoal. Flakes of falling snow were fluttering in
that light. Tushin had not returned, the doctor had not come. He was alone
now, except for a soldier who was sitting naked at the other side of the fire,
warming his thin yellow body.
"Nobody wants me!" thought Rostov. "There is no one to help me or pity me.
Yet I was once at home, strong, happy, and loved." He sighed and, doing so,
groaned involuntarily.
"Eh, is anything hurting you?" asked the soldier, shaking his shirt out over the
fire, and not waiting for an answer he gave a grunt and added: "What a lot of
men have been crippled today—frightful!"
Rostov did not listen to the soldier. He looked at the snowflakes fluttering
above the fire and remembered a Russian winter at his warm, bright home, his
fluffy fur coat, his quickly gliding sleigh, his healthy body, and all the
affection and care of his family. "And why did I come here?" he wondered.
Next day the French army did not renew their attack, and the remnant of
Bagration's detachment was reunited to Kutuzov's army.
BOOK THREE: 1805
CHAPTER I
Prince Vasili was not a man who deliberately thought out his plans. Still less
did he think of injuring anyone for his own advantage. He was merely a man
of the world who had got on and to whom getting on had become a habit.
Schemes and devices for which he never rightly accounted to himself, but
which formed the whole interest of his life, were constantly shaping
themselves in his mind, arising from the circumstances and persons he met. Of
these plans he had not merely one or two in his head but dozens, some only
beginning to form themselves, some approaching achievement, and some in
course of disintegration. He did not, for instance, say to himself: "This man
now has influence, I must gain his confidence and friendship and through him
obtain a special grant." Nor did he say to himself: "Pierre is a rich man, I must
entice him to marry my daughter and lend me the forty thousand rubles I
need." But when he came across a man of position his instinct immediately
told him that this man could be useful, and without any premeditation Prince
Vasili took the first opportunity to gain his confidence, flatter him, become
intimate with him, and finally make his request.
He had Pierre at hand in Moscow and procured for him an appointment as
Gentleman of the Bedchamber, which at that time conferred the status of
Councilor of State, and insisted on the young man accompanying him to
Petersburg and staying at his house. With apparent absent-mindedness, yet
with unhesitating assurance that he was doing the right thing, Prince Vasili did
everything to get Pierre to marry his daughter. Had he thought out his plans
beforehand he could not have been so natural and shown such unaffected
familiarity in intercourse with everybody both above and below him in social
standing. Something always drew him toward those richer and more powerful
than himself and he had rare skill in seizing the most opportune moment for
making use of people.
Pierre, on unexpectedly becoming Count Bezukhov and a rich man, felt
himself after his recent loneliness and freedom from cares so beset and
preoccupied that only in bed was he able to be by himself. He had to sign
papers, to present himself at government offices, the purpose of which was not
clear to him, to question his chief steward, to visit his estate near Moscow, and
to receive many people who formerly did not even wish to know of his
existence but would now have been offended and grieved had he chosen not to
see them. These different people—businessmen, relations, and acquaintances
alike—were all disposed to treat the young heir in the most friendly and
flattering manner: they were all evidently firmly convinced of Pierre's noble
qualities. He was always hearing such words as: "With your remarkable
kindness," or, "With your excellent heart," "You are yourself so honorable
Count," or, "Were he as clever as you," and so on, till he began sincerely to
believe in his own exceptional kindness and extraordinary intelligence, the
more so as in the depth of his heart it had always seemed to him that he really
was very kind and intelligent. Even people who had formerly been spiteful
toward him and evidently unfriendly now became gentle and affectionate. The
angry eldest princess, with the long waist and hair plastered down like a doll's,
had come into Pierre's room after the funeral. With drooping eyes and frequent
blushes she told him she was very sorry about their past misunderstandings
and did not now feel she had a right to ask him for anything, except only for
permission, after the blow she had received, to remain for a few weeks longer
in the house she so loved and where she had sacrificed so much. She could not
refrain from weeping at these words. Touched that this statuesque princess
could so change, Pierre took her hand and begged her forgiveness, without
knowing what for. From that day the eldest princess quite changed toward
Pierre and began knitting a striped scarf for him.
"Do this for my sake, mon cher; after all, she had to put up with a great deal
from the deceased," said Prince Vasili to him, handing him a deed to sign for
the princess' benefit.
Prince Vasili had come to the conclusion that it was necessary to throw this
bone—a bill for thirty thousand rubles—to the poor princess that it might not
occur to her to speak of his share in the affair of the inlaid portfolio. Pierre
signed the deed and after that the princess grew still kinder. The younger
sisters also became affectionate to him, especially the youngest, the pretty one
with the mole, who often made him feel confused by her smiles and her own
confusion when meeting him.
It seemed so natural to Pierre that everyone should like him, and it would have
seemed so unnatural had anyone disliked him, that he could not but believe in
the sincerity of those around him. Besides, he had no time to ask himself
whether these people were sincere or not. He was always busy and always felt
in a state of mild and cheerful intoxication. He felt as though he were the
center of some important and general movement; that something was
constantly expected of him, that if he did not do it he would grieve and
disappoint many people, but if he did this and that, all would be well; and he
did what was demanded of him, but still that happy result always remained in
the future.
More than anyone else, Prince Vasili took possession of Pierre's affairs and of
Pierre himself in those early days. From the death of Count Bezukhov he did
not let go his hold of the lad. He had the air of a man oppressed by business,
weary and suffering, who yet would not, for pity's sake, leave this helpless
youth who, after all, was the son of his old friend and the possessor of such
enormous wealth, to the caprice of fate and the designs of rogues. During the
few days he spent in Moscow after the death of Count Bezukhov, he would
call Pierre, or go to him himself, and tell him what ought to be done in a tone
of weariness and assurance, as if he were adding every time: "You know I am
overwhelmed with business and it is purely out of charity that I trouble myself
about you, and you also know quite well that what I propose is the only thing
possible."
"Well, my dear fellow, tomorrow we are off at last," said Prince Vasili one day,
closing his eyes and fingering Pierre's elbow, speaking as if he were saying
something which had long since been agreed upon and could not now be
altered. "We start tomorrow and I'm giving you a place in my carriage. I am
very glad. All our important business here is now settled, and I ought to have
been off long ago. Here is something I have received from the chancellor. I
asked him for you, and you have been entered in the diplomatic corps and
made a Gentleman of the Bedchamber. The diplomatic career now lies open
before you."
Notwithstanding the tone of wearied assurance with which these words were
pronounced, Pierre, who had so long been considering his career, wished to
make some suggestion. But Prince Vasili interrupted him in the special deep
cooing tone, precluding the possibility of interrupting his speech, which he
used in extreme cases when special persuasion was needed.
"Mais, mon cher, I did this for my own sake, to satisfy my conscience, and
there is nothing to thank me for. No one has ever complained yet of being too
much loved; and besides, you are free, you could throw it up tomorrow. But
you will see everything for yourself when you get to Petersburg. It is high time
for you to get away from these terrible recollections." Prince Vasili sighed.
"Yes, yes, my boy. And my valet can go in your carriage. Ah! I was nearly
forgetting," he added. "You know, mon cher, your father and I had some
accounts to settle, so I have received what was due from the Ryazan estate and
will keep it; you won't require it. We'll go into the accounts later."
By "what was due from the Ryazan estate" Prince Vasili meant several
thousand rubles quitrent received from Pierre's peasants, which the prince had
retained for himself.
In Petersburg, as in Moscow, Pierre found the same atmosphere of gentleness
and affection. He could not refuse the post, or rather the rank (for he did
nothing), that Prince Vasili had procured for him, and acquaintances,
invitations, and social occupations were so numerous that, even more than in
Moscow, he felt a sense of bewilderment, bustle, and continual expectation of
some good, always in front of him but never attained.
Of his former bachelor acquaintances many were no longer in Petersburg. The
Guards had gone to the front; Dolokhov had been reduced to the ranks;
Anatole was in the army somewhere in the provinces; Prince Andrew was
abroad; so Pierre had not the opportunity to spend his nights as he used to like
to spend them, or to open his mind by intimate talks with a friend older than
himself and whom he respected. His whole time was taken up with dinners
and balls and was spent chiefly at Prince Vasili's house in the company of the
stout princess, his wife, and his beautiful daughter Helene.
Like the others, Anna Pavlovna Scherer showed Pierre the change of attitude
toward him that had taken place in society.
Formerly in Anna Pavlovna's presence, Pierre had always felt that what he was
saying was out of place, tactless and unsuitable, that remarks which seemed to
him clever while they formed in his mind became foolish as soon as he uttered
them, while on the contrary Hippolyte's stupidest remarks came out clever and
apt. Now everything Pierre said was charmant. Even if Anna Pavlovna did not
say so, he could see that she wished to and only refrained out of regard for his
modesty.
In the beginning of the winter of 1805-6 Pierre received one of Anna
Pavlovna's usual pink notes with an invitation to which was added: "You will
find the beautiful Helene here, whom it is always delightful to see."
When he read that sentence, Pierre felt for the first time that some link which
other people recognized had grown up between himself and Helene, and that
thought both alarmed him, as if some obligation were being imposed on him
which he could not fulfill, and pleased him as an entertaining supposition.
Anna Pavlovna's "At Home" was like the former one, only the novelty she
offered her guests this time was not Mortemart, but a diplomatist fresh from
Berlin with the very latest details of the Emperor Alexander's visit to Potsdam,
and of how the two august friends had pledged themselves in an indissoluble
alliance to uphold the cause of justice against the enemy of the human race.
Anna Pavlovna received Pierre with a shade of melancholy, evidently relating
to the young man's recent loss by the death of Count Bezukhov (everyone
constantly considered it a duty to assure Pierre that he was greatly afflicted by
the death of the father he had hardly known), and her melancholy was just like
the august melancholy she showed at the mention of her most august Majesty
the Empress Marya Fedorovna. Pierre felt flattered by this. Anna Pavlovna
arranged the different groups in her drawing room with her habitual skill. The
large group, in which were Prince Vasili and the generals, had the benefit of
the diplomat. Another group was at the tea table. Pierre wished to join the
former, but Anna Pavlovna—who was in the excited condition of a
commander on a battlefield to whom thousands of new and brilliant ideas
occur which there is hardly time to put in action—seeing Pierre, touched his
sleeve with her finger, saying:
"Wait a bit, I have something in view for you this evening." (She glanced at
Helene and smiled at her.) "My dear Helene, be charitable to my poor aunt
who adores you. Go and keep her company for ten minutes. And that it will
not be too dull, here is the dear count who will not refuse to accompany you."
The beauty went to the aunt, but Anna Pavlovna detained Pierre, looking as if
she had to give some final necessary instructions.
"Isn't she exquisite?" she said to Pierre, pointing to the stately beauty as she
glided away. "And how she carries herself! For so young a girl, such tact, such
masterly perfection of manner! It comes from her heart. Happy the man who
wins her! With her the least worldly of men would occupy a most brilliant
position in society. Don't you think so? I only wanted to know your opinion,"
and Anna Pavlovna let Pierre go.
Pierre, in reply, sincerely agreed with her as to Helene's perfection of manner.
If he ever thought of Helene, it was just of her beauty and her remarkable skill
in appearing silently dignified in society.
The old aunt received the two young people in her corner, but seemed desirous
of hiding her adoration for Helene and inclined rather to show her fear of
Anna Pavlovna. She looked at her niece, as if inquiring what she was to do
with these people. On leaving them, Anna Pavlovna again touched Pierre's
sleeve, saying: "I hope you won't say that it is dull in my house again," and she
glanced at Helene.
Helene smiled, with a look implying that she did not admit the possibility of
anyone seeing her without being enchanted. The aunt coughed, swallowed,
and said in French that she was very pleased to see Helene, then she turned to
Pierre with the same words of welcome and the same look. In the middle of a
dull and halting conversation, Helene turned to Pierre with the beautiful bright
smile that she gave to everyone. Pierre was so used to that smile, and it had so
little meaning for him, that he paid no attention to it. The aunt was just
speaking of a collection of snuffboxes that had belonged to Pierre's father,
Count Bezukhov, and showed them her own box. Princess Helene asked to see
the portrait of the aunt's husband on the box lid.
"That is probably the work of Vinesse," said Pierre, mentioning a celebrated
miniaturist, and he leaned over the table to take the snuffbox while trying to
hear what was being said at the other table.
He half rose, meaning to go round, but the aunt handed him the snuffbox,
passing it across Helene's back. Helene stooped forward to make room, and
looked round with a smile. She was, as always at evening parties, wearing a
dress such as was then fashionable, cut very low at front and back. Her bust,
which had always seemed like marble to Pierre, was so close to him that his
shortsighted eyes could not but perceive the living charm of her neck and
shoulders, so near to his lips that he need only have bent his head a little to
have touched them. He was conscious of the warmth of her body, the scent of
perfume, and the creaking of her corset as she moved. He did not see her
marble beauty forming a complete whole with her dress, but all the charm of
her body only covered by her garments. And having once seen this he could
not help being aware of it, just as we cannot renew an illusion we have once
seen through.
"So you have never noticed before how beautiful I am?" Helene seemed to
say. "You had not noticed that I am a woman? Yes, I am a woman who may
belong to anyone—to you too," said her glance. And at that moment Pierre felt
that Helene not only could, but must, be his wife, and that it could not be
otherwise.
He knew this at that moment as surely as if he had been standing at the altar
with her. How and when this would be he did not know, he did not even know
if it would be a good thing (he even felt, he knew not why, that it would be a
bad thing), but he knew it would happen.
Pierre dropped his eyes, lifted them again, and wished once more to see her as
a distant beauty far removed from him, as he had seen her every day until
then, but he could no longer do it. He could not, any more than a man who has
been looking at a tuft of steppe grass through the mist and taking it for a tree
can again take it for a tree after he has once recognized it to be a tuft of grass.
She was terribly close to him. She already had power over him, and between
them there was no longer any barrier except the barrier of his own will.
"Well, I will leave you in your little corner," came Anna Pavlovna's voice, "I
see you are all right there."
And Pierre, anxiously trying to remember whether he had done anything
reprehensible, looked round with a blush. It seemed to him that everyone knew
what had happened to him as he knew it himself.
A little later when he went up to the large circle, Anna Pavlovna said to him:
"I hear you are refitting your Petersburg house?"
This was true. The architect had told him that it was necessary, and Pierre,
without knowing why, was having his enormous Petersburg house done up.
"That's a good thing, but don't move from Prince Vasili's. It is good to have a
friend like the prince," she said, smiling at Prince Vasili. "I know something
about that. Don't I? And you are still so young. You need advice. Don't be
angry with me for exercising an old woman's privilege."
She paused, as women always do, expecting something after they have
mentioned their age. "If you marry it will be a different thing," she continued,
uniting them both in one glance. Pierre did not look at Helene nor she at him.
But she was just as terribly close to him. He muttered something and colored.
When he got home he could not sleep for a long time for thinking of what had
happened. What had happened? Nothing. He had merely understood that the
woman he had known as a child, of whom when her beauty was mentioned he
had said absent-mindedly: "Yes, she's good looking," he had understood that
this woman might belong to him.
"But she's stupid. I have myself said she is stupid," he thought. "There is
something nasty, something wrong, in the feeling she excites in me. I have
been told that her brother Anatole was in love with her and she with him, that
there was quite a scandal and that that's why he was sent away. Hippolyte is
her brother... Prince Vasili is her father... It's bad...." he reflected, but while he
was thinking this (the reflection was still incomplete), he caught himself
smiling and was conscious that another line of thought had sprung up, and
while thinking of her worthlessness he was also dreaming of how she would
be his wife, how she would love him become quite different, and how all he
had thought and heard of her might be false. And he again saw her not as the
daughter of Prince Vasili, but visualized her whole body only veiled by its
gray dress. "But no! Why did this thought never occur to me before?" and
again he told himself that it was impossible, that there would be something
unnatural, and as it seemed to him dishonorable, in this marriage. He recalled
her former words and looks and the words and looks of those who had seen
them together. He recalled Anna Pavlovna's words and looks when she spoke
to him about his house, recalled thousands of such hints from Prince Vasili and
others, and was seized by terror lest he had already, in some way, bound
himself to do something that was evidently wrong and that he ought not to do.
But at the very time he was expressing this conviction to himself, in another
part of his mind her image rose in all its womanly beauty.
CHAPTER II
In November, 1805, Prince Vasili had to go on a tour of inspection in four
different provinces. He had arranged this for himself so as to visit his
neglected estates at the same time and pick up his son Anatole where his
regiment was stationed, and take him to visit Prince Nicholas Bolkonski in
order to arrange a match for him with the daughter of that rich old man. But
before leaving home and undertaking these new affairs, Prince Vasili had to
settle matters with Pierre, who, it is true, had latterly spent whole days at
home, that is, in Prince Vasili's house where he was staying, and had been
absurd, excited, and foolish in Helene's presence (as a lover should be), but
had not yet proposed to her.
"This is all very fine, but things must be settled," said Prince Vasili to himself,
with a sorrowful sigh, one morning, feeling that Pierre who was under such
obligations to him ("But never mind that") was not behaving very well in this
matter. "Youth, frivolity... well, God be with him," thought he, relishing his
own goodness of heart, "but it must be brought to a head. The day after
tomorrow will be Lelya's name day. I will invite two or three people, and if he
does not understand what he ought to do then it will be my affair—yes, my
affair. I am her father."
Six weeks after Anna Pavlovna's "At Home" and after the sleepless night
when he had decided that to marry Helene would be a calamity and that he
ought to avoid her and go away, Pierre, despite that decision, had not left
Prince Vasili's and felt with terror that in people's eyes he was every day more
and more connected with her, that it was impossible for him to return to his
former conception of her, that he could not break away from her, and that
though it would be a terrible thing he would have to unite his fate with hers.
He might perhaps have been able to free himself but that Prince Vasili (who
had rarely before given receptions) now hardly let a day go by without having
an evening party at which Pierre had to be present unless he wished to spoil
the general pleasure and disappoint everyone's expectation. Prince Vasili, in
the rare moments when he was at home, would take Pierre's hand in passing
and draw it downwards, or absent-mindedly hold out his wrinkled, cleanshaven cheek for Pierre to kiss and would say: "Till tomorrow," or, "Be in to
dinner or I shall not see you," or, "I am staying in for your sake," and so on.
And though Prince Vasili, when he stayed in (as he said) for Pierre's sake,
hardly exchanged a couple of words with him, Pierre felt unable to disappoint
him. Every day he said to himself one and the same thing: "It is time I
understood her and made up my mind what she really is. Was I mistaken
before, or am I mistaken now? No, she is not stupid, she is an excellent girl,"
he sometimes said to himself "she never makes a mistake, never says anything
stupid. She says little, but what she does say is always clear and simple, so she
is not stupid. She never was abashed and is not abashed now, so she cannot be
a bad woman!" He had often begun to make reflections or think aloud in her
company, and she had always answered him either by a brief but appropriate
remark—showing that it did not interest her—or by a silent look and smile
which more palpably than anything else showed Pierre her superiority. She
was right in regarding all arguments as nonsense in comparison with that
smile.
She always addressed him with a radiantly confiding smile meant for him
alone, in which there was something more significant than in the general smile
that usually brightened her face. Pierre knew that everyone was waiting for
him to say a word and cross a certain line, and he knew that sooner or later he
would step across it, but an incomprehensible terror seized him at the thought
of that dreadful step. A thousand times during that month and a half while he
felt himself drawn nearer and nearer to that dreadful abyss, Pierre said to
himself: "What am I doing? I need resolution. Can it be that I have none?"
He wished to take a decision, but felt with dismay that in this matter he lacked
that strength of will which he had known in himself and really possessed.
Pierre was one of those who are only strong when they feel themselves quite
innocent, and since that day when he was overpowered by a feeling of desire
while stooping over the snuffbox at Anna Pavlovna's, an unacknowledged
sense of the guilt of that desire paralyzed his will.
On Helene's name day, a small party of just their own people—as his wife said
—met for supper at Prince Vasili's. All these friends and relations had been
given to understand that the fate of the young girl would be decided that
evening. The visitors were seated at supper. Princess Kuragina, a portly
imposing woman who had once been handsome, was sitting at the head of the
table. On either side of her sat the more important guests—an old general and
his wife, and Anna Pavlovna Scherer. At the other end sat the younger and less
important guests, and there too sat the members of the family, and Pierre and
Helene, side by side. Prince Vasili was not having any supper: he went round
the table in a merry mood, sitting down now by one, now by another, of the
guests. To each of them he made some careless and agreeable remark except to
Pierre and Helene, whose presence he seemed not to notice. He enlivened the
whole party. The wax candles burned brightly, the silver and crystal gleamed,
so did the ladies' toilets and the gold and silver of the men's epaulets; servants
in scarlet liveries moved round the table, the clatter of plates, knives, and
glasses mingled with the animated hum of several conversations. At one end
of the table, the old chamberlain was heard assuring an old baroness that he
loved her passionately, at which she laughed; at the other could be heard the
story of the misfortunes of some Mary Viktorovna or other. At the center of
the table, Prince Vasili attracted everybody's attention. With a facetious smile
on his face, he was telling the ladies about last Wednesday's meeting of the
Imperial Council, at which Sergey Kuzmich Vyazmitinov, the new military
governor general of Petersburg, had received and read the then famous rescript
of the Emperor Alexander from the army to Sergey Kuzmich, in which the
Emperor said that he was receiving from all sides declarations of the people's
loyalty, that the declaration from Petersburg gave him particular pleasure, and
that he was proud to be at the head of such a nation and would endeavor to be
worthy of it. This rescript began with the words: "Sergey Kuzmich, From all
sides reports reach me," etc.
"Well, and so he never got farther than: 'Sergey Kuzmich'?" asked one of the
ladies.
"Exactly, not a hair's breadth farther," answered Prince Vasili, laughing,
"'Sergey Kuzmich... From all sides... From all sides... Sergey Kuzmich...' Poor
Vyazmitinov could not get any farther! He began the rescript again and again,
but as soon as he uttered 'Sergey' he sobbed, 'Kuz-mi-ch,' tears, and 'From all
sides' was smothered in sobs and he could get no farther. And again his
handkerchief, and again: 'Sergey Kuzmich, From all sides,'... and tears, till at
last somebody else was asked to read it."
"Kuzmich... From all sides... and then tears," someone repeated laughing.
"Don't be unkind," cried Anna Pavlovna from her end of the table holding up a
threatening finger. "He is such a worthy and excellent man, our dear
Vyazmitinov...."
Everybody laughed a great deal. At the head of the table, where the honored
guests sat, everyone seemed to be in high spirits and under the influence of a
variety of exciting sensations. Only Pierre and Helene sat silently side by side
almost at the bottom of the table, a suppressed smile brightening both their
faces, a smile that had nothing to do with Sergey Kuzmich—a smile of
bashfulness at their own feelings. But much as all the rest laughed, talked, and
joked, much as they enjoyed their Rhine wine, saute, and ices, and however
they avoided looking at the young couple, and heedless and unobservant as
they seemed of them, one could feel by the occasional glances they gave that
the story about Sergey Kuzmich, the laughter, and the food were all a pretense,
and that the whole attention of that company was directed to—Pierre and
Helene. Prince Vasili mimicked the sobbing of Sergey Kuzmich and at the
same time his eyes glanced toward his daughter, and while he laughed the
expression on his face clearly said: "Yes... it's getting on, it will all be settled
today." Anna Pavlovna threatened him on behalf of "our dear Vyazmitinov,"
and in her eyes, which, for an instant, glanced at Pierre, Prince Vasili read a
congratulation on his future son-in-law and on his daughter's happiness. The
old princess sighed sadly as she offered some wine to the old lady next to her
and glanced angrily at her daughter, and her sigh seemed to say: "Yes, there's
nothing left for you and me but to sip sweet wine, my dear, now that the time
has come for these young ones to be thus boldly, provocatively happy." "And
what nonsense all this is that I am saying!" thought a diplomatist, glancing at
the happy faces of the lovers. "That's happiness!"
Into the insignificant, trifling, and artificial interests uniting that society had
entered the simple feeling of the attraction of a healthy and handsome young
man and woman for one another. And this human feeling dominated
everything else and soared above all their affected chatter. Jests fell flat, news
was not interesting, and the animation was evidently forced. Not only the
guests but even the footmen waiting at table seemed to feel this, and they
forgot their duties as they looked at the beautiful Helene with her radiant face
and at the red, broad, and happy though uneasy face of Pierre. It seemed as if
the very light of the candles was focused on those two happy faces alone.
Pierre felt that he was the center of it all, and this both pleased and
embarrassed him. He was like a man entirely absorbed in some occupation. He
did not see, hear, or understand anything clearly. Only now and then detached
ideas and impressions from the world of reality shot unexpectedly through his
mind.
"So it is all finished!" he thought. "And how has it all happened? How
quickly! Now I know that not because of her alone, nor of myself alone, but
because of everyone, it must inevitably come about. They are all expecting it,
they are so sure that it will happen that I cannot, I cannot, disappoint them. But
how will it be? I do not know, but it will certainly happen!" thought Pierre,
glancing at those dazzling shoulders close to his eyes.
Or he would suddenly feel ashamed of he knew not what. He felt it awkward
to attract everyone's attention and to be considered a lucky man and, with his
plain face, to be looked on as a sort of Paris possessed of a Helen. "But no
doubt it always is and must be so!" he consoled himself. "And besides, what
have I done to bring it about? How did it begin? I traveled from Moscow with
Prince Vasili. Then there was nothing. So why should I not stay at his house?
Then I played cards with her and picked up her reticule and drove out with her.
How did it begin, when did it all come about?" And here he was sitting by her
side as her betrothed, seeing, hearing, feeling her nearness, her breathing, her
movements, her beauty. Then it would suddenly seem to him that it was not
she but he was so unusually beautiful, and that that was why they all looked so
at him, and flattered by this general admiration he would expand his chest,
raise his head, and rejoice at his good fortune. Suddenly he heard a familiar
voice repeating something to him a second time. But Pierre was so absorbed
that he did not understand what was said.
"I am asking you when you last heard from Bolkonski," repeated Prince Vasili
a third time. "How absent-minded you are, my dear fellow."
Prince Vasili smiled, and Pierre noticed that everyone was smiling at him and
Helene. "Well, what of it, if you all know it?" thought Pierre. "What of it? It's
the truth!" and he himself smiled his gentle childlike smile, and Helene smiled
too.
"When did you get the letter? Was it from Olmutz?" repeated Prince Vasili,
who pretended to want to know this in order to settle a dispute.
"How can one talk or think of such trifles?" thought Pierre.
"Yes, from Olmutz," he answered, with a sigh.
After supper Pierre with his partner followed the others into the drawing room.
The guests began to disperse, some without taking leave of Helene. Some, as
if unwilling to distract her from an important occupation, came up to her for a
moment and made haste to go away, refusing to let her see them off. The
diplomatist preserved a mournful silence as he left the drawing room. He
pictured the vanity of his diplomatic career in comparison with Pierre's
happiness. The old general grumbled at his wife when she asked how his leg
was. "Oh, the old fool," he thought. "That Princess Helene will be beautiful
still when she's fifty."
"I think I may congratulate you," whispered Anna Pavlovna to the old
princess, kissing her soundly. "If I hadn't this headache I'd have stayed longer."
The old princess did not reply, she was tormented by jealousy of her daughter's
happiness.
While the guests were taking their leave Pierre remained for a long time alone
with Helene in the little drawing room where they were sitting. He had often
before, during the last six weeks, remained alone with her, but had never
spoken to her of love. Now he felt that it was inevitable, but he could not make
up his mind to take the final step. He felt ashamed; he felt that he was
occupying someone else's place here beside Helene. "This happiness is not for
you," some inner voice whispered to him. "This happiness is for those who
have not in them what there is in you."
But, as he had to say something, he began by asking her whether she was
satisfied with the party. She replied in her usual simple manner that this name
day of hers had been one of the pleasantest she had ever had.
Some of the nearest relatives had not yet left. They were sitting in the large
drawing room. Prince Vasili came up to Pierre with languid footsteps. Pierre
rose and said it was getting late. Prince Vasili gave him a look of stern inquiry,
as though what Pierre had just said was so strange that one could not take it in.
But then the expression of severity changed, and he drew Pierre's hand
downwards, made him sit down, and smiled affectionately.
"Well, Lelya?" he asked, turning instantly to his daughter and addressing her
with the careless tone of habitual tenderness natural to parents who have
petted their children from babyhood, but which Prince Vasili had only
acquired by imitating other parents.
And he again turned to Pierre.
"Sergey Kuzmich—From all sides-" he said, unbuttoning the top button of his
waistcoat.
Pierre smiled, but his smile showed that he knew it was not the story about
Sergey Kuzmich that interested Prince Vasili just then, and Prince Vasili saw
that Pierre knew this. He suddenly muttered something and went away. It
seemed to Pierre that even the prince was disconcerted. The sight of the
discomposure of that old man of the world touched Pierre: he looked at Helene
and she too seemed disconcerted, and her look seemed to say: "Well, it is your
own fault."
"The step must be taken but I cannot, I cannot!" thought Pierre, and he again
began speaking about indifferent matters, about Sergey Kuzmich, asking what
the point of the story was as he had not heard it properly. Helene answered
with a smile that she too had missed it.
When Prince Vasili returned to the drawing room, the princess, his wife, was
talking in low tones to the elderly lady about Pierre.
"Of course, it is a very brilliant match, but happiness, my dear..."
"Marriages are made in heaven," replied the elderly lady.
Prince Vasili passed by, seeming not to hear the ladies, and sat down on a sofa
in a far corner of the room. He closed his eyes and seemed to be dozing. His
head sank forward and then he roused himself.
"Aline," he said to his wife, "go and see what they are about."
The princess went up to the door, passed by it with a dignified and indifferent
air, and glanced into the little drawing room. Pierre and Helene still sat talking
just as before.
"Still the same," she said to her husband.
Prince Vasili frowned, twisting his mouth, his cheeks quivered and his face
assumed the coarse, unpleasant expression peculiar to him. Shaking himself,
he rose, threw back his head, and with resolute steps went past the ladies into
the little drawing room. With quick steps he went joyfully up to Pierre. His
face was so unusually triumphant that Pierre rose in alarm on seeing it.
"Thank God!" said Prince Vasili. "My wife has told me everything!" (He put
one arm around Pierre and the other around his daughter.)—"My dear boy...
Lelya... I am very pleased." (His voice trembled.) "I loved your father... and
she will make you a good wife... God bless you!..."
He embraced his daughter, and then again Pierre, and kissed him with his
malodorous mouth. Tears actually moistened his cheeks.
"Princess, come here!" he shouted.
The old princess came in and also wept. The elderly lady was using her
handkerchief too. Pierre was kissed, and he kissed the beautiful Helene's hand
several times. After a while they were left alone again.
"All this had to be and could not be otherwise," thought Pierre, "so it is useless
to ask whether it is good or bad. It is good because it's definite and one is rid
of the old tormenting doubt." Pierre held the hand of his betrothed in silence,
looking at her beautiful bosom as it rose and fell.
"Helene!" he said aloud and paused.
"Something special is always said in such cases," he thought, but could not
remember what it was that people say. He looked at her face. She drew nearer
to him. Her face flushed.
"Oh, take those off... those..." she said, pointing to his spectacles.
Pierre took them off, and his eyes, besides the strange look eyes have from
which spectacles have just been removed, had also a frightened and inquiring
look. He was about to stoop over her hand and kiss it, but with a rapid, almost
brutal movement of her head, she intercepted his lips and met them with her
own. Her face struck Pierre, by its altered, unpleasantly excited expression.
"It is too late now, it's done; besides I love her," thought Pierre.
"Je vous aime!" * he said, remembering what has to be said at such moments:
but his words sounded so weak that he felt ashamed of himself.
* "I love you."
Six weeks later he was married, and settled in Count Bezukhov's large, newly
furnished Petersburg house, the happy possessor, as people said, of a wife who
was a celebrated beauty and of millions of money.
CHAPTER III
Old Prince Nicholas Bolkonski received a letter from Prince Vasili in
November, 1805, announcing that he and his son would be paying him a visit.
"I am starting on a journey of inspection, and of course I shall think nothing of
an extra seventy miles to come and see you at the same time, my honored
benefactor," wrote Prince Vasili. "My son Anatole is accompanying me on his
way to the army, so I hope you will allow him personally to express the deep
respect that, emulating his father, he feels for you."
"It seems that there will be no need to bring Mary out, suitors are coming to us
of their own accord," incautiously remarked the little princess on hearing the
news.
Prince Nicholas frowned, but said nothing.
A fortnight after the letter Prince Vasili's servants came one evening in
advance of him, and he and his son arrived next day.
Old Bolkonski had always had a poor opinion of Prince Vasili's character, but
more so recently, since in the new reigns of Paul and Alexander Prince Vasili
had risen to high position and honors. And now, from the hints contained in
his letter and given by the little princess, he saw which way the wind was
blowing, and his low opinion changed into a feeling of contemptuous ill will.
He snorted whenever he mentioned him. On the day of Prince Vasili's arrival,
Prince Bolkonski was particularly discontented and out of temper. Whether he
was in a bad temper because Prince Vasili was coming, or whether his being in
a bad temper made him specially annoyed at Prince Vasili's visit, he was in a
bad temper, and in the morning Tikhon had already advised the architect not to
go to the prince with his report.
"Do you hear how he's walking?" said Tikhon, drawing the architect's
attention to the sound of the prince's footsteps. "Stepping flat on his heels—we
know what that means...."
However, at nine o'clock the prince, in his velvet coat with a sable collar and
cap, went out for his usual walk. It had snowed the day before and the path to
the hothouse, along which the prince was in the habit of walking, had been
swept: the marks of the broom were still visible in the snow and a shovel had
been left sticking in one of the soft snowbanks that bordered both sides of the
path. The prince went through the conservatories, the serfs' quarters, and the
outbuildings, frowning and silent.
"Can a sleigh pass?" he asked his overseer, a venerable man, resembling his
master in manners and looks, who was accompanying him back to the house.
"The snow is deep. I am having the avenue swept, your honor."
The prince bowed his head and went up to the porch. "God be thanked,"
thought the overseer, "the storm has blown over!"
"It would have been hard to drive up, your honor," he added. "I heard, your
honor, that a minister is coming to visit your honor."
The prince turned round to the overseer and fixed his eyes on him, frowning.
"What? A minister? What minister? Who gave orders?" he said in his shrill,
harsh voice. "The road is not swept for the princess my daughter, but for a
minister! For me, there are no ministers!"
"Your honor, I thought..."
"You thought!" shouted the prince, his words coming more and more rapidly
and indistinctly. "You thought!... Rascals! Blackguards!... I'll teach you to
think!" and lifting his stick he swung it and would have hit Alpatych, the
overseer, had not the latter instinctively avoided the blow. "Thought...
Blackguards..." shouted the prince rapidly.
But although Alpatych, frightened at his own temerity in avoiding the stroke,
came up to the prince, bowing his bald head resignedly before him, or perhaps
for that very reason, the prince, though he continued to shout: "Blackguards!...
Throw the snow back on the road!" did not lift his stick again but hurried into
the house.
Before dinner, Princess Mary and Mademoiselle Bourienne, who knew that
the prince was in a bad humor, stood awaiting him; Mademoiselle Bourienne
with a radiant face that said: "I know nothing, I am the same as usual," and
Princess Mary pale, frightened, and with downcast eyes. What she found
hardest to bear was to know that on such occasions she ought to behave like
Mademoiselle Bourienne, but could not. She thought: "If I seem not to notice
he will think that I do not sympathize with him; if I seem sad and out of spirits
myself, he will say (as he has done before) that I'm in the dumps."
The prince looked at his daughter's frightened face and snorted.
"Fool... or dummy!" he muttered.
"And the other one is not here. They've been telling tales," he thought—
referring to the little princess who was not in the dining room.
"Where is the princess?" he asked. "Hiding?"
"She is not very well," answered Mademoiselle Bourienne with a bright smile,
"so she won't come down. It is natural in her state."
"Hm! Hm!" muttered the prince, sitting down.
His plate seemed to him not quite clean, and pointing to a spot he flung it
away. Tikhon caught it and handed it to a footman. The little princess was not
unwell, but had such an overpowering fear of the prince that, hearing he was
in a bad humor, she had decided not to appear.
"I am afraid for the baby," she said to Mademoiselle Bourienne: "Heaven
knows what a fright might do."
In general at Bald Hills the little princess lived in constant fear, and with a
sense of antipathy to the old prince which she did not realize because the fear
was so much the stronger feeling. The prince reciprocated this antipathy, but it
was overpowered by his contempt for her. When the little princess had grown
accustomed to life at Bald Hills, she took a special fancy to Mademoiselle
Bourienne, spent whole days with her, asked her to sleep in her room, and
often talked with her about the old prince and criticized him.
"So we are to have visitors, mon prince?" remarked Mademoiselle Bourienne,
unfolding her white napkin with her rosy fingers. "His Excellency Prince
Vasili Kuragin and his son, I understand?" she said inquiringly.
"Hm!—his excellency is a puppy.... I got him his appointment in the service,"
said the prince disdainfully. "Why his son is coming I don't understand.
Perhaps Princess Elizabeth and Princess Mary know. I don't want him." (He
looked at his blushing daughter.) "Are you unwell today? Eh? Afraid of the
'minister' as that idiot Alpatych called him this morning?"
"No, mon pere."
Though Mademoiselle Bourienne had been so unsuccessful in her choice of a
subject, she did not stop talking, but chattered about the conservatories and the
beauty of a flower that had just opened, and after the soup the prince became
more genial.
After dinner, he went to see his daughter-in-law. The little princess was sitting
at a small table, chattering with Masha, her maid. She grew pale on seeing her
father-in-law.
She was much altered. She was now plain rather than pretty. Her cheeks had
sunk, her lip was drawn up, and her eyes drawn down.
"Yes, I feel a kind of oppression," she said in reply to the prince's question as
to how she felt.
"Do you want anything?"
"No, merci, mon pere."
"Well, all right, all right."
He left the room and went to the waiting room where Alpatych stood with
bowed head.
"Has the snow been shoveled back?"
"Yes, your excellency. Forgive me for heaven's sake... It was only my
stupidity."
"All right, all right," interrupted the prince, and laughing his unnatural way, he
stretched out his hand for Alpatych to kiss, and then proceeded to his study.
Prince Vasili arrived that evening. He was met in the avenue by coachmen and
footmen, who, with loud shouts, dragged his sleighs up to one of the lodges
over the road purposely laden with snow.
Prince Vasili and Anatole had separate rooms assigned to them.
Anatole, having taken off his overcoat, sat with arms akimbo before a table on
a corner of which he smilingly and absent-mindedly fixed his large and
handsome eyes. He regarded his whole life as a continual round of amusement
which someone for some reason had to provide for him. And he looked on this
visit to a churlish old man and a rich and ugly heiress in the same way. All this
might, he thought, turn out very well and amusingly. "And why not marry her
if she really has so much money? That never does any harm," thought Anatole.
He shaved and scented himself with the care and elegance which had become
habitual to him and, his handsome head held high, entered his father's room
with the good-humored and victorious air natural to him. Prince Vasili's two
valets were busy dressing him, and he looked round with much animation and
cheerfully nodded to his son as the latter entered, as if to say: "Yes, that's how
I want you to look."
"I say, Father, joking apart, is she very hideous?" Anatole asked, as if
continuing a conversation the subject of which had often been mentioned
during the journey.
"Enough! What nonsense! Above all, try to be respectful and cautious with the
old prince."
"If he starts a row I'll go away," said Prince Anatole. "I can't bear those old
men! Eh?"
"Remember, for you everything depends on this."
In the meantime, not only was it known in the maidservants' rooms that the
minister and his son had arrived, but the appearance of both had been minutely
described. Princess Mary was sitting alone in her room, vainly trying to master
her agitation.
"Why did they write, why did Lise tell me about it? It can never happen!" she
said, looking at herself in the glass. "How shall I enter the drawing room?
Even if I like him I can't now be myself with him." The mere thought of her
father's look filled her with terror. The little princess and Mademoiselle
Bourienne had already received from Masha, the lady's maid, the necessary
report of how handsome the minister's son was, with his rosy cheeks and dark
eyebrows, and with what difficulty the father had dragged his legs upstairs
while the son had followed him like an eagle, three steps at a time. Having
received this information, the little princess and Mademoiselle Bourienne,
whose chattering voices had reached her from the corridor, went into Princess
Mary's room.
"You know they've come, Marie?" said the little princess, waddling in, and
sinking heavily into an armchair.
She was no longer in the loose gown she generally wore in the morning, but
had on one of her best dresses. Her hair was carefully done and her face was
animated, which, however, did not conceal its sunken and faded outlines.
Dressed as she used to be in Petersburg society, it was still more noticeable
how much plainer she had become. Some unobtrusive touch had been added to
Mademoiselle Bourienne's toilet which rendered her fresh and pretty face yet
more attractive.
"What! Are you going to remain as you are, dear princess?" she began.
"They'll be announcing that the gentlemen are in the drawing room and we
shall have to go down, and you have not smartened yourself up at all!"
The little princess got up, rang for the maid, and hurriedly and merrily began
to devise and carry out a plan of how Princess Mary should be dressed.
Princess Mary's self-esteem was wounded by the fact that the arrival of a
suitor agitated her, and still more so by both her companions' not having the
least conception that it could be otherwise. To tell them that she felt ashamed
for herself and for them would be to betray her agitation, while to decline their
offers to dress her would prolong their banter and insistence. She flushed, her
beautiful eyes grew dim, red blotches came on her face, and it took on the
unattractive martyrlike expression it so often wore, as she submitted herself to
Mademoiselle Bourienne and Lise. Both these women quite sincerely tried to
make her look pretty. She was so plain that neither of them could think of her
as a rival, so they began dressing her with perfect sincerity, and with the naive
and firm conviction women have that dress can make a face pretty.
"No really, my dear, this dress is not pretty," said Lise, looking sideways at
Princess Mary from a little distance. "You have a maroon dress, have it
fetched. Really! You know the fate of your whole life may be at stake. But this
one is too light, it's not becoming!"
It was not the dress, but the face and whole figure of Princess Mary that was
not pretty, but neither Mademoiselle Bourienne nor the little princess felt this;
they still thought that if a blue ribbon were placed in the hair, the hair combed
up, and the blue scarf arranged lower on the best maroon dress, and so on, all
would be well. They forgot that the frightened face and the figure could not be
altered, and that however they might change the setting and adornment of that
face, it would still remain piteous and plain. After two or three changes to
which Princess Mary meekly submitted, just as her hair had been arranged on
the top of her head (a style that quite altered and spoiled her looks) and she
had put on a maroon dress with a pale-blue scarf, the little princess walked
twice round her, now adjusting a fold of the dress with her little hand, now
arranging the scarf and looking at her with her head bent first on one side and
then on the other.
"No, it will not do," she said decidedly, clasping her hands. "No, Mary, really
this dress does not suit you. I prefer you in your little gray everyday dress.
Now please, do it for my sake. Katie," she said to the maid, "bring the princess
her gray dress, and you'll see, Mademoiselle Bourienne, how I shall arrange
it," she added, smiling with a foretaste of artistic pleasure.
But when Katie brought the required dress, Princess Mary remained sitting
motionless before the glass, looking at her face, and saw in the mirror her eyes
full of tears and her mouth quivering, ready to burst into sobs.
"Come, dear princess," said Mademoiselle Bourienne, "just one more little
effort."
The little princess, taking the dress from the maid, came up to Princess Mary.
"Well, now we'll arrange something quite simple and becoming," she said.
The three voices, hers, Mademoiselle Bourienne's, and Katie's, who was
laughing at something, mingled in a merry sound, like the chirping of birds.
"No, leave me alone," said Princess Mary.
Her voice sounded so serious and so sad that the chirping of the birds was
silenced at once. They looked at the beautiful, large, thoughtful eyes full of
tears and of thoughts, gazing shiningly and imploringly at them, and
understood that it was useless and even cruel to insist.
"At least, change your coiffure," said the little princess. "Didn't I tell you," she
went on, turning reproachfully to Mademoiselle Bourienne, "Mary's is a face
which such a coiffure does not suit in the least. Not in the least! Please change
it."
"Leave me alone, please leave me alone! It is all quite the same to me,"
answered a voice struggling with tears.
Mademoiselle Bourienne and the little princess had to own to themselves that
Princess Mary in this guise looked very plain, worse than usual, but it was too
late. She was looking at them with an expression they both knew, an
expression thoughtful and sad. This expression in Princess Mary did not
frighten them (she never inspired fear in anyone), but they knew that when it
appeared on her face, she became mute and was not to be shaken in her
determination.
"You will change it, won't you?" said Lise. And as Princess Mary gave no
answer, she left the room.
Princess Mary was left alone. She did not comply with Lise's request, she not
only left her hair as it was, but did not even look in her glass. Letting her arms
fall helplessly, she sat with downcast eyes and pondered. A husband, a man, a
strong dominant and strangely attractive being rose in her imagination, and
carried her into a totally different happy world of his own. She fancied a child,
her own—such as she had seen the day before in the arms of her nurse's
daughter—at her own breast, the husband standing by and gazing tenderly at
her and the child. "But no, it is impossible, I am too ugly," she thought.
"Please come to tea. The prince will be out in a moment," came the maid's
voice at the door.
She roused herself, and felt appalled at what she had been thinking, and before
going down she went into the room where the icons hung and, her eyes fixed
on the dark face of a large icon of the Saviour lit by a lamp, she stood before it
with folded hands for a few moments. A painful doubt filled her soul. Could
the joy of love, of earthly love for a man, be for her? In her thoughts of
marriage Princess Mary dreamed of happiness and of children, but her
strongest, most deeply hidden longing was for earthly love. The more she tried
to hide this feeling from others and even from herself, the stronger it grew. "O
God," she said, "how am I to stifle in my heart these temptations of the devil?
How am I to renounce forever these vile fancies, so as peacefully to fulfill Thy
will?" And scarcely had she put that question than God gave her the answer in
her own heart. "Desire nothing for thyself, seek nothing, be not anxious or
envious. Man's future and thy own fate must remain hidden from thee, but live
so that thou mayest be ready for anything. If it be God's will to prove thee in
the duties of marriage, be ready to fulfill His will." With this consoling
thought (but yet with a hope for the fulfillment of her forbidden earthly
longing) Princess Mary sighed, and having crossed herself went down,
thinking neither of her gown and coiffure nor of how she would go in nor of
what she would say. What could all that matter in comparison with the will of
God, without Whose care not a hair of man's head can fall?
CHAPTER IV
When Princess Mary came down, Prince Vasili and his son were already in the
drawing room, talking to the little princess and Mademoiselle Bourienne.
When she entered with her heavy step, treading on her heels, the gentlemen
and Mademoiselle Bourienne rose and the little princess, indicating her to the
gentlemen, said: "Voila Marie!" Princess Mary saw them all and saw them in
detail. She saw Prince Vasili's face, serious for an instant at the sight of her,
but immediately smiling again, and the little princess curiously noting the
impression "Marie" produced on the visitors. And she saw Mademoiselle
Bourienne, with her ribbon and pretty face, and her unusually animated look
which was fixed on him, but him she could not see, she only saw something
large, brilliant, and handsome moving toward her as she entered the room.
Prince Vasili approached first, and she kissed the bold forehead that bent over
her hand and answered his question by saying that, on the contrary, she
remembered him quite well. Then Anatole came up to her. She still could not
see him. She only felt a soft hand taking hers firmly, and she touched with her
lips a white forehead, over which was beautiful light-brown hair smelling of
pomade. When she looked up at him she was struck by his beauty. Anatole
stood with his right thumb under a button of his uniform, his chest expanded
and his back drawn in, slightly swinging one foot, and, with his head a little
bent, looked with beaming face at the princess without speaking and evidently
not thinking about her at all. Anatole was not quick-witted, nor ready or
eloquent in conversation, but he had the faculty, so invaluable in society, of
composure and imperturbable self-possession. If a man lacking in selfconfidence remains dumb on a first introduction and betrays a consciousness
of the impropriety of such silence and an anxiety to find something to say, the
effect is bad. But Anatole was dumb, swung his foot, and smilingly examined
the princess' hair. It was evident that he could be silent in this way for a very
long time. "If anyone finds this silence inconvenient, let him talk, but I don't
want to," he seemed to say. Besides this, in his behavior to women Anatole
had a manner which particularly inspires in them curiosity, awe, and even love
—a supercilious consciousness of his own superiority. It was as if he said to
them: "I know you, I know you, but why should I bother about you? You'd be
only too glad, of course." Perhaps he did not really think this when he met
women—even probably he did not, for in general he thought very little—but
his looks and manner gave that impression. The princess felt this, and as if
wishing to show him that she did not even dare expect to interest him, she
turned to his father. The conversation was general and animated, thanks to
Princess Lise's voice and little downy lip that lifted over her white teeth. She
met Prince Vasili with that playful manner often employed by lively chatty
people, and consisting in the assumption that between the person they so
address and themselves there are some semi-private, long-established jokes
and amusing reminiscences, though no such reminiscences really exist—just
as none existed in this case. Prince Vasili readily adopted her tone and the little
princess also drew Anatole, whom she hardly knew, into these amusing
recollections of things that had never occurred. Mademoiselle Bourienne also
shared them and even Princess Mary felt herself pleasantly made to share in
these merry reminiscences.
"Here at least we shall have the benefit of your company all to ourselves, dear
prince," said the little princess (of course, in French) to Prince Vasili. "It's not
as at Annette's * receptions where you always ran away; you remember cette
chere Annette!"
* Anna Pavlovna.
"Ah, but you won't talk politics to me like Annette!"
"And our little tea table?"
"Oh, yes!"
"Why is it you were never at Annette's?" the little princess asked Anatole.
"Ah, I know, I know," she said with a sly glance, "your brother Hippolyte told
me about your goings on. Oh!" and she shook her finger at him, "I have even
heard of your doings in Paris!"
"And didn't Hippolyte tell you?" asked Prince Vasili, turning to his son and
seizing the little princess' arm as if she would have run away and he had just
managed to catch her, "didn't he tell you how he himself was pining for the
dear princess, and how she showed him the door? Oh, she is a pearl among
women, Princess," he added, turning to Princess Mary.
When Paris was mentioned, Mademoiselle Bourienne for her part seized the
opportunity of joining in the general current of recollections.
She took the liberty of inquiring whether it was long since Anatole had left
Paris and how he had liked that city. Anatole answered the Frenchwoman very
readily and, looking at her with a smile, talked to her about her native land.
When he saw the pretty little Bourienne, Anatole came to the conclusion that
he would not find Bald Hills dull either. "Not at all bad!" he thought,
examining her, "not at all bad, that little companion! I hope she will bring her
along with her when we're married, la petite est gentille." *
* The little one is charming.
The old prince dressed leisurely in his study, frowning and considering what
he was to do. The coming of these visitors annoyed him. "What are Prince
Vasili and that son of his to me? Prince Vasili is a shallow braggart and his
son, no doubt, is a fine specimen," he grumbled to himself. What angered him
was that the coming of these visitors revived in his mind an unsettled question
he always tried to stifle, one about which he always deceived himself. The
question was whether he could ever bring himself to part from his daughter
and give her to a husband. The prince never directly asked himself that
question, knowing beforehand that he would have to answer it justly, and
justice clashed not only with his feelings but with the very possibility of life.
Life without Princess Mary, little as he seemed to value her, was unthinkable
to him. "And why should she marry?" he thought. "To be unhappy for certain.
There's Lise, married to Andrew—a better husband one would think could
hardly be found nowadays—but is she contented with her lot? And who would
marry Marie for love? Plain and awkward! They'll take her for her connections
and wealth. Are there no women living unmarried, and even the happier for
it?" So thought Prince Bolkonski while dressing, and yet the question he was
always putting off demanded an immediate answer. Prince Vasili had brought
his son with the evident intention of proposing, and today or tomorrow he
would probably ask for an answer. His birth and position in society were not
bad. "Well, I've nothing against it," the prince said to himself, "but he must be
worthy of her. And that is what we shall see."
"That is what we shall see! That is what we shall see!" he added aloud.
He entered the drawing room with his usual alert step, glancing rapidly round
the company. He noticed the change in the little princess' dress, Mademoiselle
Bourienne's ribbon, Princess Mary's unbecoming coiffure, Mademoiselle
Bourienne's and Anatole's smiles, and the loneliness of his daughter amid the
general conversation. "Got herself up like a fool!" he thought, looking irritably
at her. "She is shameless, and he ignores her!"
He went straight up to Prince Vasili.
"Well! How d'ye do? How d'ye do? Glad to see you!"
"Friendship laughs at distance," began Prince Vasili in his usual rapid, selfconfident, familiar tone. "Here is my second son; please love and befriend
him."
Prince Bolkonski surveyed Anatole.
"Fine young fellow! Fine young fellow!" he said. "Well, come and kiss me,"
and he offered his cheek.
Anatole kissed the old man, and looked at him with curiosity and perfect
composure, waiting for a display of the eccentricities his father had told him to
expect.
Prince Bolkonski sat down in his usual place in the corner of the sofa and,
drawing up an armchair for Prince Vasili, pointed to it and began questioning
him about political affairs and news. He seemed to listen attentively to what
Prince Vasili said, but kept glancing at Princess Mary.
"And so they are writing from Potsdam already?" he said, repeating Prince
Vasili's last words. Then rising, he suddenly went up to his daughter.
"Is it for visitors you've got yourself up like that, eh?" said he. "Fine, very
fine! You have done up your hair in this new way for the visitors, and before
the visitors I tell you that in future you are never to dare to change your way of
dress without my consent."
"It was my fault, mon pere," interceded the little princess, with a blush.
"You must do as you please," said Prince Bolkonski, bowing to his daughterin-law, "but she need not make a fool of herself, she's plain enough as it is."
And he sat down again, paying no more attention to his daughter, who was
reduced to tears.
"On the contrary, that coiffure suits the princess very well," said Prince Vasili.
"Now you, young prince, what's your name?" said Prince Bolkonski, turning
to Anatole, "come here, let us talk and get acquainted."
"Now the fun begins," thought Anatole, sitting down with a smile beside the
old prince.
"Well, my dear boy, I hear you've been educated abroad, not taught to read and
write by the deacon, like your father and me. Now tell me, my dear boy, are
you serving in the Horse Guards?" asked the old man, scrutinizing Anatole
closely and intently.
"No, I have been transferred to the line," said Anatole, hardly able to restrain
his laughter.
"Ah! That's a good thing. So, my dear boy, you wish to serve the Tsar and the
country? It is wartime. Such a fine fellow must serve. Well, are you off to the
front?"
"No, Prince, our regiment has gone to the front, but I am attached... what is it I
am attached to, Papa?" said Anatole, turning to his father with a laugh.
"A splendid soldier, splendid! 'What am I attached to!' Ha, ha, ha!" laughed
Prince Bolkonski, and Anatole laughed still louder. Suddenly Prince
Bolkonski frowned.
"You may go," he said to Anatole.
Anatole returned smiling to the ladies.
"And so you've had him educated abroad, Prince Vasili, haven't you?" said the
old prince to Prince Vasili.
"I have done my best for him, and I can assure you the education there is much
better than ours."
"Yes, everything is different nowadays, everything is changed. The lad's a fine
fellow, a fine fellow! Well, come with me now." He took Prince Vasili's arm
and led him to his study. As soon as they were alone together, Prince Vasili
announced his hopes and wishes to the old prince.
"Well, do you think I shall prevent her, that I can't part from her?" said the old
prince angrily. "What an idea! I'm ready for it tomorrow! Only let me tell you,
I want to know my son-in-law better. You know my principles—everything
aboveboard? I will ask her tomorrow in your presence; if she is willing, then
he can stay on. He can stay and I'll see." The old prince snorted. "Let her
marry, it's all the same to me!" he screamed in the same piercing tone as when
parting from his son.
"I will tell you frankly," said Prince Vasili in the tone of a crafty man
convinced of the futility of being cunning with so keen-sighted a companion.
"You know, you see right through people. Anatole is no genius, but he is an
honest, goodhearted lad; an excellent son or kinsman."
"All right, all right, we'll see!"
As always happens when women lead lonely lives for any length of time
without male society, on Anatole's appearance all the three women of Prince
Bolkonski's household felt that their life had not been real till then. Their
powers of reasoning, feeling, and observing immediately increased tenfold,
and their life, which seemed to have been passed in darkness, was suddenly lit
up by a new brightness, full of significance.
Princess Mary grew quite unconscious of her face and coiffure. The handsome
open face of the man who might perhaps be her husband absorbed all her
attention. He seemed to her kind, brave, determined, manly, and
magnanimous. She felt convinced of that. Thousands of dreams of a future
family life continually rose in her imagination. She drove them away and tried
to conceal them.
"But am I not too cold with him?" thought the princess. "I try to be reserved
because in the depth of my soul I feel too near to him already, but then he
cannot know what I think of him and may imagine that I do not like him."
And Princess Mary tried, but could not manage, to be cordial to her new guest.
"Poor girl, she's devilish ugly!" thought Anatole.
Mademoiselle Bourienne, also roused to great excitement by Anatole's arrival,
thought in another way. Of course, she, a handsome young woman without
any definite position, without relations or even a country, did not intend to
devote her life to serving Prince Bolkonski, to reading aloud to him and being
friends with Princess Mary. Mademoiselle Bourienne had long been waiting
for a Russian prince who, able to appreciate at a glance her superiority to the
plain, badly dressed, ungainly Russian princesses, would fall in love with her
and carry her off; and here at last was a Russian prince. Mademoiselle
Bourienne knew a story, heard from her aunt but finished in her own way,
which she liked to repeat to herself. It was the story of a girl who had been
seduced, and to whom her poor mother (sa pauvre mere) appeared, and
reproached her for yielding to a man without being married. Mademoiselle
Bourienne was often touched to tears as in imagination she told this story to
him, her seducer. And now he, a real Russian prince, had appeared. He would
carry her away and then sa pauvre mere would appear and he would marry her.
So her future shaped itself in Mademoiselle Bourienne's head at the very time
she was talking to Anatole about Paris. It was not calculation that guided her
(she did not even for a moment consider what she should do), but all this had
long been familiar to her, and now that Anatole had appeared it just grouped
itself around him and she wished and tried to please him as much as possible.
The little princess, like an old war horse that hears the trumpet, unconsciously
and quite forgetting her condition, prepared for the familiar gallop of coquetry,
without any ulterior motive or any struggle, but with naive and lighthearted
gaiety.
Although in female society Anatole usually assumed the role of a man tired of
being run after by women, his vanity was flattered by the spectacle of his
power over these three women. Besides that, he was beginning to feel for the
pretty and provocative Mademoiselle Bourienne that passionate animal feeling
which was apt to master him with great suddenness and prompt him to the
coarsest and most reckless actions.
After tea, the company went into the sitting room and Princess Mary was
asked to play on the clavichord. Anatole, laughing and in high spirits, came
and leaned on his elbows, facing her and beside Mademoiselle Bourienne.
Princess Mary felt his look with a painfully joyous emotion. Her favorite
sonata bore her into a most intimately poetic world and the look she felt upon
her made that world still more poetic. But Anatole's expression, though his
eyes were fixed on her, referred not to her but to the movements of
Mademoiselle Bourienne's little foot, which he was then touching with his
own under the clavichord. Mademoiselle Bourienne was also looking at
Princess Mary, and in her lovely eyes there was a look of fearful joy and hope
that was also new to the princess.
"How she loves me!" thought Princess Mary. "How happy I am now, and how
happy I may be with such a friend and such a husband! Husband? Can it be
possible?" she thought, not daring to look at his face, but still feeling his eyes
gazing at her.
In the evening, after supper, when all were about to retire, Anatole kissed
Princess Mary's hand. She did not know how she found the courage, but she
looked straight into his handsome face as it came near to her shortsighted eyes.
Turning from Princess Mary he went up and kissed Mademoiselle Bourienne's
hand. (This was not etiquette, but then he did everything so simply and with
such assurance!) Mademoiselle Bourienne flushed, and gave the princess a
frightened look.
"What delicacy!" thought the princess. "Is it possible that Amelie"
(Mademoiselle Bourienne) "thinks I could be jealous of her, and not value her
pure affection and devotion to me?" She went up to her and kissed her warmly.
Anatole went up to kiss the little princess' hand.
"No! No! No! When your father writes to tell me that you are behaving well I
will give you my hand to kiss. Not till then!" she said. And smilingly raising a
finger at him, she left the room.
CHAPTER V
They all separated, but, except Anatole who fell asleep as soon as he got into
bed, all kept awake a long time that night.
"Is he really to be my husband, this stranger who is so kind—yes, kind, that is
the chief thing," thought Princess Mary; and fear, which she had seldom
experienced, came upon her. She feared to look round, it seemed to her that
someone was there standing behind the screen in the dark corner. And this
someone was he—the devil—and he was also this man with the white
forehead, black eyebrows, and red lips.
She rang for her maid and asked her to sleep in her room.
Mademoiselle Bourienne walked up and down the conservatory for a long
time that evening, vainly expecting someone, now smiling at someone, now
working herself up to tears with the imaginary words of her pauvre mere
rebuking her for her fall.
The little princess grumbled to her maid that her bed was badly made. She
could not lie either on her face or on her side. Every position was awkward
and uncomfortable, and her burden oppressed her now more than ever because
Anatole's presence had vividly recalled to her the time when she was not like
that and when everything was light and gay. She sat in an armchair in her
dressing jacket and nightcap and Katie, sleepy and disheveled, beat and turned
the heavy feather bed for the third time, muttering to herself.
"I told you it was all lumps and holes!" the little princess repeated. "I should
be glad enough to fall asleep, so it's not my fault!" and her voice quivered like
that of a child about to cry.
The old prince did not sleep either. Tikhon, half asleep, heard him pacing
angrily about and snorting. The old prince felt as though he had been insulted
through his daughter. The insult was the more pointed because it concerned
not himself but another, his daughter, whom he loved more than himself. He
kept telling himself that he would consider the whole matter and decide what
was right and how he should act, but instead of that he only excited himself
more and more.
"The first man that turns up—she forgets her father and everything else, runs
upstairs and does up her hair and wags her tail and is unlike herself! Glad to
throw her father over! And she knew I should notice it. Fr... fr... fr! And don't I
see that that idiot had eyes only for Bourienne—I shall have to get rid of her.
And how is it she has not pride enough to see it? If she has no pride for herself
she might at least have some for my sake! She must be shown that the
blockhead thinks nothing of her and looks only at Bourienne. No, she has no
pride... but I'll let her see...."
The old prince knew that if he told his daughter she was making a mistake and
that Anatole meant to flirt with Mademoiselle Bourienne, Princess Mary's selfesteem would be wounded and his point (not to be parted from her) would be
gained, so pacifying himself with this thought, he called Tikhon and began to
undress.
"What devil brought them here?" thought he, while Tikhon was putting the
nightshirt over his dried-up old body and gray-haired chest. "I never invited
them. They came to disturb my life—and there is not much of it left."
"Devil take 'em!" he muttered, while his head was still covered by the shirt.
Tikhon knew his master's habit of sometimes thinking aloud, and therefore
met with unaltered looks the angrily inquisitive expression of the face that
emerged from the shirt.
"Gone to bed?" asked the prince.
Tikhon, like all good valets, instinctively knew the direction of his master's
thoughts. He guessed that the question referred to Prince Vasili and his son.
"They have gone to bed and put out their lights, your excellency."
"No good... no good..." said the prince rapidly, and thrusting his feet into his
slippers and his arms into the sleeves of his dressing gown, he went to the
couch on which he slept.
Though no words had passed between Anatole and Mademoiselle Bourienne,
they quite understood one another as to the first part of their romance, up to
the appearance of the pauvre mere; they understood that they had much to say
to one another in private and so they had been seeking an opportunity since
morning to meet one another alone. When Princess Mary went to her father's
room at the usual hour, Mademoiselle Bourienne and Anatole met in the
conservatory.
Princess Mary went to the door of the study with special trepidation. It seemed
to her that not only did everybody know that her fate would be decided that
day, but that they also knew what she thought about it. She read this in
Tikhon's face and in that of Prince Vasili's valet, who made her a low bow
when she met him in the corridor carrying hot water.
The old prince was very affectionate and careful in his treatment of his
daughter that morning. Princess Mary well knew this painstaking expression
of her father's. His face wore that expression when his dry hands clenched
with vexation at her not understanding a sum in arithmetic, when rising from
his chair he would walk away from her, repeating in a low voice the same
words several times over.
He came to the point at once, treating her ceremoniously.
"I have had a proposition made me concerning you," he said with an unnatural
smile. "I expect you have guessed that Prince Vasili has not come and brought
his pupil with him" (for some reason Prince Bolkonski referred to Anatole as a
"pupil") "for the sake of my beautiful eyes. Last night a proposition was made
me on your account and, as you know my principles, I refer it to you."
"How am I to understand you, mon pere?" said the princess, growing pale and
then blushing.
"How understand me!" cried her father angrily. "Prince Vasili finds you to his
taste as a daughter-in-law and makes a proposal to you on his pupil's behalf.
That's how it's to be understood! 'How understand it'!... And I ask you!"
"I do not know what you think, Father," whispered the princess.
"I? I? What of me? Leave me out of the question. I'm not going to get married.
What about you? That's what I want to know."
The princess saw that her father regarded the matter with disapproval, but at
that moment the thought occurred to her that her fate would be decided now or
never. She lowered her eyes so as not to see the gaze under which she felt that
she could not think, but would only be able to submit from habit, and she said:
"I wish only to do your will, but if I had to express my own desire..." She had
no time to finish. The old prince interrupted her.
"That's admirable!" he shouted. "He will take you with your dowry and take
Mademoiselle Bourienne into the bargain. She'll be the wife, while you..."
The prince stopped. He saw the effect these words had produced on his
daughter. She lowered her head and was ready to burst into tears.
"Now then, now then, I'm only joking!" he said. "Remember this, Princess, I
hold to the principle that a maiden has a full right to choose. I give you
freedom. Only remember that your life's happiness depends on your decision.
Never mind me!"
"But I do not know, Father!"
"There's no need to talk! He receives his orders and will marry you or
anybody; but you are free to choose.... Go to your room, think it over, and
come back in an hour and tell me in his presence: yes or no. I know you will
pray over it. Well, pray if you like, but you had better think it over. Go! Yes or
no, yes or no, yes or no!" he still shouted when the princess, as if lost in a fog,
had already staggered out of the study.
Her fate was decided and happily decided. But what her father had said about
Mademoiselle Bourienne was dreadful. It was untrue to be sure, but still it was
terrible, and she could not help thinking of it. She was going straight on
through the conservatory, neither seeing nor hearing anything, when suddenly
the well-known whispering of Mademoiselle Bourienne aroused her. She
raised her eyes, and two steps away saw Anatole embracing the Frenchwoman
and whispering something to her. With a horrified expression on his handsome
face, Anatole looked at Princess Mary, but did not at once take his arm from
the waist of Mademoiselle Bourienne who had not yet seen her.
"Who's that? Why? Wait a moment!" Anatole's face seemed to say. Princess
Mary looked at them in silence. She could not understand it. At last
Mademoiselle Bourienne gave a scream and ran away. Anatole bowed to
Princess Mary with a gay smile, as if inviting her to join in a laugh at this
strange incident, and then shrugging his shoulders went to the door that led to
his own apartments.
An hour later, Tikhon came to call Princess Mary to the old prince; he added
that Prince Vasili was also there. When Tikhon came to her Princess Mary was
sitting on the sofa in her room, holding the weeping Mademoiselle Bourienne
in her arms and gently stroking her hair. The princess' beautiful eyes with all
their former calm radiance were looking with tender affection and pity at
Mademoiselle Bourienne's pretty face.
"No, Princess, I have lost your affection forever!" said Mademoiselle
Bourienne.
"Why? I love you more than ever," said Princess Mary, "and I will try to do all
I can for your happiness."
"But you despise me. You who are so pure can never understand being so
carried away by passion. Oh, only my poor mother..."
"I quite understand," answered Princess Mary, with a sad smile. "Calm
yourself, my dear. I will go to my father," she said, and went out.
Prince Vasili, with one leg thrown high over the other and a snuffbox in his
hand, was sitting there with a smile of deep emotion on his face, as if stirred to
his heart's core and himself regretting and laughing at his own sensibility,
when Princess Mary entered. He hurriedly took a pinch of snuff.
"Ah, my dear, my dear!" he began, rising and taking her by both hands. Then,
sighing, he added: "My son's fate is in your hands. Decide, my dear, good,
gentle Marie, whom I have always loved as a daughter!"
He drew back and a real tear appeared in his eye.
"Fr... fr..." snorted Prince Bolkonski. "The prince is making a proposition to
you in his pupil's—I mean, his son's—name. Do you wish or not to be Prince
Anatole Kuragin's wife? Reply: yes or no," he shouted, "and then I shall
reserve the right to state my opinion also. Yes, my opinion, and only my
opinion," added Prince Bolkonski, turning to Prince Vasili and answering his
imploring look. "Yes, or no?"
"My desire is never to leave you, Father, never to separate my life from yours.
I don't wish to marry," she answered positively, glancing at Prince Vasili and at
her father with her beautiful eyes.
"Humbug! Nonsense! Humbug, humbug, humbug!" cried Prince Bolkonski,
frowning and taking his daughter's hand; he did not kiss her, but only bending
his forehead to hers just touched it, and pressed her hand so that she winced
and uttered a cry.
Prince Vasili rose.
"My dear, I must tell you that this is a moment I shall never, never forget. But,
my dear, will you not give us a little hope of touching this heart, so kind and
generous? Say 'perhaps'... The future is so long. Say 'perhaps.'"
"Prince, what I have said is all there is in my heart. I thank you for the honor,
but I shall never be your son's wife."
"Well, so that's finished, my dear fellow! I am very glad to have seen you.
Very glad! Go back to your rooms, Princess. Go!" said the old prince. "Very,
very glad to have seen you," repeated he, embracing Prince Vasili.
"My vocation is a different one," thought Princess Mary. "My vocation is to be
happy with another kind of happiness, the happiness of love and self-sacrifice.
And cost what it may, I will arrange poor Amelie's happiness, she loves him so
passionately, and so passionately repents. I will do all I can to arrange the
match between them. If he is not rich I will give her the means; I will ask my
father and Andrew. I shall be so happy when she is his wife. She is so
unfortunate, a stranger, alone, helpless! And, oh God, how passionately she
must love him if she could so far forget herself! Perhaps I might have done the
same!..." thought Princess Mary.
CHAPTER VI
It was long since the Rostovs had news of Nicholas. Not till midwinter was the
count at last handed a letter addressed in his son's handwriting. On receiving
it, he ran on tiptoe to his study in alarm and haste, trying to escape notice,
closed the door, and began to read the letter.
Anna Mikhaylovna, who always knew everything that passed in the house, on
hearing of the arrival of the letter went softly into the room and found the
count with it in his hand, sobbing and laughing at the same time.
Anna Mikhaylovna, though her circumstances had improved, was still living
with the Rostovs.
"My dear friend?" said she, in a tone of pathetic inquiry, prepared to
sympathize in any way.
The count sobbed yet more.
"Nikolenka... a letter... wa... a... s... wounded... my darling boy... the
countess... promoted to be an officer... thank God... How tell the little
countess!"
Anna Mikhaylovna sat down beside him, with her own handkerchief wiped the
tears from his eyes and from the letter, then having dried her own eyes she
comforted the count, and decided that at dinner and till teatime she would
prepare the countess, and after tea, with God's help, would inform her.
At dinner Anna Mikhaylovna talked the whole time about the war news and
about Nikolenka, twice asked when the last letter had been received from him,
though she knew that already, and remarked that they might very likely be
getting a letter from him that day. Each time that these hints began to make the
countess anxious and she glanced uneasily at the count and at Anna
Mikhaylovna, the latter very adroitly turned the conversation to insignificant
matters. Natasha, who, of the whole family, was the most gifted with a
capacity to feel any shades of intonation, look, and expression, pricked up her
ears from the beginning of the meal and was certain that there was some secret
between her father and Anna Mikhaylovna, that it had something to do with
her brother, and that Anna Mikhaylovna was preparing them for it. Bold as she
was, Natasha, who knew how sensitive her mother was to anything relating to
Nikolenka, did not venture to ask any questions at dinner, but she was too
excited to eat anything and kept wriggling about on her chair regardless of her
governess' remarks. After dinner, she rushed head long after Anna
Mikhaylovna and, dashing at her, flung herself on her neck as soon as she
overtook her in the sitting room.
"Auntie, darling, do tell me what it is!"
"Nothing, my dear."
"No, dearest, sweet one, honey, I won't give up—I know you know
something."
Anna Mikhaylovna shook her head.
"You are a little slyboots," she said.
"A letter from Nikolenka! I'm sure of it!" exclaimed Natasha, reading
confirmation in Anna Mikhaylovna's face.
"But for God's sake, be careful, you know how it may affect your mamma."
"I will, I will, only tell me! You won't? Then I will go and tell at once."
Anna Mikhaylovna, in a few words, told her the contents of the letter, on
condition that she should tell no one.
"No, on my true word of honor," said Natasha, crossing herself, "I won't tell
anyone!" and she ran off at once to Sonya.
"Nikolenka... wounded... a letter," she announced in gleeful triumph.
"Nicholas!" was all Sonya said, instantly turning white.
Natasha, seeing the impression the news of her brother's wound produced on
Sonya, felt for the first time the sorrowful side of the news.
She rushed to Sonya, hugged her, and began to cry.
"A little wound, but he has been made an officer; he is well now, he wrote
himself," said she through her tears.
"There now! It's true that all you women are crybabies," remarked Petya,
pacing the room with large, resolute strides. "Now I'm very glad, very glad
indeed, that my brother has distinguished himself so. You are all blubberers
and understand nothing."
Natasha smiled through her tears.
"You haven't read the letter?" asked Sonya.
"No, but she said that it was all over and that he's now an officer."
"Thank God!" said Sonya, crossing herself. "But perhaps she deceived you.
Let us go to Mamma."
Petya paced the room in silence for a time.
"If I'd been in Nikolenka's place I would have killed even more of those
Frenchmen," he said. "What nasty brutes they are! I'd have killed so many that
there'd have been a heap of them."
"Hold your tongue, Petya, what a goose you are!"
"I'm not a goose, but they are who cry about trifles," said Petya.
"Do you remember him?" Natasha suddenly asked, after a moment's silence.
Sonya smiled.
"Do I remember Nicholas?"
"No, Sonya, but do you remember so that you remember him perfectly,
remember everything?" said Natasha, with an expressive gesture, evidently
wishing to give her words a very definite meaning. "I remember Nikolenka
too, I remember him well," she said. "But I don't remember Boris. I don't
remember him a bit."
"What! You don't remember Boris?" asked Sonya in surprise.
"It's not that I don't remember—I know what he is like, but not as I remember
Nikolenka. Him—I just shut my eyes and remember, but Boris... No!" (She
shut her eyes.) "No! there's nothing at all."
"Oh, Natasha!" said Sonya, looking ecstatically and earnestly at her friend as
if she did not consider her worthy to hear what she meant to say and as if she
were saying it to someone else, with whom joking was out of the question, "I
am in love with your brother once for all and, whatever may happen to him or
to me, shall never cease to love him as long as I live."
Natasha looked at Sonya with wondering and inquisitive eyes, and said
nothing. She felt that Sonya was speaking the truth, that there was such love as
Sonya was speaking of. But Natasha had not yet felt anything like it. She
believed it could be, but did not understand it.
"Shall you write to him?" she asked.
Sonya became thoughtful. The question of how to write to Nicholas, and
whether she ought to write, tormented her. Now that he was already an officer
and a wounded hero, would it be right to remind him of herself and, as it might
seem, of the obligations to her he had taken on himself?
"I don't know. I think if he writes, I will write too," she said, blushing.
"And you won't feel ashamed to write to him?"
Sonya smiled.
"No."
"And I should be ashamed to write to Boris. I'm not going to."
"Why should you be ashamed?"
"Well, I don't know. It's awkward and would make me ashamed."
"And I know why she'd be ashamed," said Petya, offended by Natasha's
previous remark. "It's because she was in love with that fat one in spectacles"
(that was how Petya described his namesake, the new Count Bezukhov) "and
now she's in love with that singer" (he meant Natasha's Italian singing master),
"that's why she's ashamed!"
"Petya, you're a stupid!" said Natasha.
"Not more stupid than you, madam," said the nine-year-old Petya, with the air
of an old brigadier.
The countess had been prepared by Anna Mikhaylovna's hints at dinner. On
retiring to her own room, she sat in an armchair, her eyes fixed on a miniature
portrait of her son on the lid of a snuffbox, while the tears kept coming into
her eyes. Anna Mikhaylovna, with the letter, came on tiptoe to the countess'
door and paused.
"Don't come in," she said to the old count who was following her. "Come
later." And she went in, closing the door behind her.
The count put his ear to the keyhole and listened.
At first he heard the sound of indifferent voices, then Anna Mikhaylovna's
voice alone in a long speech, then a cry, then silence, then both voices together
with glad intonations, and then footsteps. Anna Mikhaylovna opened the door.
Her face wore the proud expression of a surgeon who has just performed a
difficult operation and admits the public to appreciate his skill.
"It is done!" she said to the count, pointing triumphantly to the countess, who
sat holding in one hand the snuffbox with its portrait and in the other the letter,
and pressing them alternately to her lips.
When she saw the count, she stretched out her arms to him, embraced his bald
head, over which she again looked at the letter and the portrait, and in order to
press them again to her lips, she slightly pushed away the bald head. Vera,
Natasha, Sonya, and Petya now entered the room, and the reading of the letter
began. After a brief description of the campaign and the two battles in which
he had taken part, and his promotion, Nicholas said that he kissed his father's
and mother's hands asking for their blessing, and that he kissed Vera, Natasha,
and Petya. Besides that, he sent greetings to Monsieur Schelling, Madame
Schoss, and his old nurse, and asked them to kiss for him "dear Sonya, whom
he loved and thought of just the same as ever." When she heard this Sonya
blushed so that tears came into her eyes and, unable to bear the looks turned
upon her, ran away into the dancing hall, whirled round it at full speed with
her dress puffed out like a balloon, and, flushed and smiling, plumped down
on the floor. The countess was crying.
"Why are you crying, Mamma?" asked Vera. "From all he says one should be
glad and not cry."
This was quite true, but the count, the countess, and Natasha looked at her
reproachfully. "And who is it she takes after?" thought the countess.
Nicholas' letter was read over hundreds of times, and those who were
considered worthy to hear it had to come to the countess, for she did not let it
out of her hands. The tutors came, and the nurses, and Dmitri, and several
acquaintances, and the countess reread the letter each time with fresh pleasure
and each time discovered in it fresh proofs of Nikolenka's virtues. How
strange, how extraordinary, how joyful it seemed, that her son, the scarcely
perceptible motion of whose tiny limbs she had felt twenty years ago within
her, that son about whom she used to have quarrels with the too indulgent
count, that son who had first learned to say "pear" and then "granny," that this
son should now be away in a foreign land amid strange surroundings, a manly
warrior doing some kind of man's work of his own, without help or guidance.
The universal experience of ages, showing that children do grow
imperceptibly from the cradle to manhood, did not exist for the countess. Her
son's growth toward manhood, at each of its stages, had seemed as
extraordinary to her as if there had never existed the millions of human beings
who grew up in the same way. As twenty years before, it seemed impossible
that the little creature who lived somewhere under her heart would ever cry,
suck her breast, and begin to speak, so now she could not believe that that
little creature could be this strong, brave man, this model son and officer that,
judging by this letter, he now was.
"What a style! How charmingly he describes!" said she, reading the
descriptive part of the letter. "And what a soul! Not a word about himself....
Not a word! About some Denisov or other, though he himself, I dare say, is
braver than any of them. He says nothing about his sufferings. What a heart!
How like him it is! And how he has remembered everybody! Not forgetting
anyone. I always said when he was only so high—I always said...."
For more than a week preparations were being made, rough drafts of letters to
Nicholas from all the household were written and copied out, while under the
supervision of the countess and the solicitude of the count, money and all
things necessary for the uniform and equipment of the newly commissioned
officer were collected. Anna Mikhaylovna, practical woman that she was, had
even managed by favor with army authorities to secure advantageous means of
communication for herself and her son. She had opportunities of sending her
letters to the Grand Duke Constantine Pavlovich, who commanded the Guards.
The Rostovs supposed that The Russian Guards, Abroad, was quite a definite
address, and that if a letter reached the Grand Duke in command of the Guards
there was no reason why it should not reach the Pavlograd regiment, which
was presumably somewhere in the same neighborhood. And so it was decided
to send the letters and money by the Grand Duke's courier to Boris and Boris
was to forward them to Nicholas. The letters were from the old count, the
countess, Petya, Vera, Natasha, and Sonya, and finally there were six thousand
rubles for his outfit and various other things the old count sent to his son.
CHAPTER VII
On the twelfth of November, Kutuzov's active army, in camp before Olmutz,
was preparing to be reviewed next day by the two Emperors—the Russian and
the Austrian. The Guards, just arrived from Russia, spent the night ten miles
from Olmutz and next morning were to come straight to the review, reaching
the field at Olmutz by ten o'clock.
That day Nicholas Rostov received a letter from Boris, telling him that the
Ismaylov regiment was quartered for the night ten miles from Olmutz and that
he wanted to see him as he had a letter and money for him. Rostov was
particularly in need of money now that the troops, after their active service,
were stationed near Olmutz and the camp swarmed with well-provisioned
sutlers and Austrian Jews offering all sorts of tempting wares. The Pavlograds
held feast after feast, celebrating awards they had received for the campaign,
and made expeditions to Olmutz to visit a certain Caroline the Hungarian, who
had recently opened a restaurant there with girls as waitresses. Rostov, who
had just celebrated his promotion to a cornetcy and bought Denisov's horse,
Bedouin, was in debt all round, to his comrades and the sutlers. On receiving
Boris' letter he rode with a fellow officer to Olmutz, dined there, drank a bottle
of wine, and then set off alone to the Guards' camp to find his old playmate.
Rostov had not yet had time to get his uniform. He had on a shabby cadet
jacket, decorated with a soldier's cross, equally shabby cadet's riding breeches
lined with worn leather, and an officer's saber with a sword knot. The Don
horse he was riding was one he had bought from a Cossack during the
campaign, and he wore a crumpled hussar cap stuck jauntily back on one side
of his head. As he rode up to the camp he thought how he would impress Boris
and all his comrades of the Guards by his appearance—that of a fighting
hussar who had been under fire.
The Guards had made their whole march as if on a pleasure trip, parading their
cleanliness and discipline. They had come by easy stages, their knapsacks
conveyed on carts, and the Austrian authorities had provided excellent dinners
for the officers at every halting place. The regiments had entered and left the
town with their bands playing, and by the Grand Duke's orders the men had
marched all the way in step (a practice on which the Guards prided
themselves), the officers on foot and at their proper posts. Boris had been
quartered, and had marched all the way, with Berg who was already in
command of a company. Berg, who had obtained his captaincy during the
campaign, had gained the confidence of his superiors by his promptitude and
accuracy and had arranged his money matters very satisfactorily. Boris, during
the campaign, had made the acquaintance of many persons who might prove
useful to him, and by a letter of recommendation he had brought from Pierre
had become acquainted with Prince Andrew Bolkonski, through whom he
hoped to obtain a post on the commander-in-chief's staff. Berg and Boris,
having rested after yesterday's march, were sitting, clean and neatly dressed, at
a round table in the clean quarters allotted to them, playing chess. Berg held a
smoking pipe between his knees. Boris, in the accurate way characteristic of
him, was building a little pyramid of chessmen with his delicate white fingers
while awaiting Berg's move, and watched his opponent's face, evidently
thinking about the game as he always thought only of whatever he was
engaged on.
"Well, how are you going to get out of that?" he remarked.
"We'll try to," replied Berg, touching a pawn and then removing his hand.
At that moment the door opened.
"Here he is at last!" shouted Rostov. "And Berg too! Oh, you petisenfans, allay
cushay dormir!" he exclaimed, imitating his Russian nurse's French, at which
he and Boris used to laugh long ago.
"Dear me, how you have changed!"
Boris rose to meet Rostov, but in doing so did not omit to steady and replace
some chessmen that were falling. He was about to embrace his friend, but
Nicholas avoided him. With that peculiar feeling of youth, that dread of beaten
tracks, and wish to express itself in a manner different from that of its elders
which is often insincere, Nicholas wished to do something special on meeting
his friend. He wanted to pinch him, push him, do anything but kiss him—a
thing everybody did. But notwithstanding this, Boris embraced him in a quiet,
friendly way and kissed him three times.
They had not met for nearly half a year and, being at the age when young men
take their first steps on life's road, each saw immense changes in the other,
quite a new reflection of the society in which they had taken those first steps.
Both had changed greatly since they last met and both were in a hurry to show
the changes that had taken place in them.
"Oh, you damned dandies! Clean and fresh as if you'd been to a fete, not like
us sinners of the line," cried Rostov, with martial swagger and with baritone
notes in his voice, new to Boris, pointing to his own mud-bespattered
breeches. The German landlady, hearing Rostov's loud voice, popped her head
in at the door.
"Eh, is she pretty?" he asked with a wink.
"Why do you shout so? You'll frighten them!" said Boris. "I did not expect you
today," he added. "I only sent you the note yesterday by Bolkonski—an
adjutant of Kutuzov's, who's a friend of mine. I did not think he would get it to
you so quickly.... Well, how are you? Been under fire already?" asked Boris.
Without answering, Rostov shook the soldier's Cross of St. George fastened to
the cording of his uniform and, indicating a bandaged arm, glanced at Berg
with a smile.
"As you see," he said.
"Indeed? Yes, yes!" said Boris, with a smile. "And we too have had a splendid
march. You know, of course, that His Imperial Highness rode with our
regiment all the time, so that we had every comfort and every advantage. What
receptions we had in Poland! What dinners and balls! I can't tell you. And the
Tsarevich was very gracious to all our officers."
And the two friends told each other of their doings, the one of his hussar revels
and life in the fighting line, the other of the pleasures and advantages of
service under members of the Imperial family.
"Oh, you Guards!" said Rostov. "I say, send for some wine."
Boris made a grimace.
"If you really want it," said he.
He went to his bed, drew a purse from under the clean pillow, and sent for
wine.
"Yes, and I have some money and a letter to give you," he added.
Rostov took the letter and, throwing the money on the sofa, put both arms on
the table and began to read. After reading a few lines, he glanced angrily at
Berg, then, meeting his eyes, hid his face behind the letter.
"Well, they've sent you a tidy sum," said Berg, eying the heavy purse that sank
into the sofa. "As for us, Count, we get along on our pay. I can tell you for
myself..."
"I say, Berg, my dear fellow," said Rostov, "when you get a letter from home
and meet one of your own people whom you want to talk everything over
with, and I happen to be there, I'll go at once, to be out of your way! Do go
somewhere, anywhere... to the devil!" he exclaimed, and immediately seizing
him by the shoulder and looking amiably into his face, evidently wishing to
soften the rudeness of his words, he added, "Don't be hurt, my dear fellow;
you know I speak from my heart as to an old acquaintance."
"Oh, don't mention it, Count! I quite understand," said Berg, getting up and
speaking in a muffled and guttural voice.
"Go across to our hosts: they invited you," added Boris.
Berg put on the cleanest of coats, without a spot or speck of dust, stood before
a looking glass and brushed the hair on his temples upwards, in the way
affected by the Emperor Alexander, and, having assured himself from the way
Rostov looked at it that his coat had been noticed, left the room with a pleasant
smile.
"Oh dear, what a beast I am!" muttered Rostov, as he read the letter.
"Why?"
"Oh, what a pig I am, not to have written and to have given them such a fright!
Oh, what a pig I am!" he repeated, flushing suddenly. "Well, have you sent
Gabriel for some wine? All right let's have some!"
In the letter from his parents was enclosed a letter of recommendation to
Bagration which the old countess at Anna Mikhaylovna's advice had obtained
through an acquaintance and sent to her son, asking him to take it to its
destination and make use of it.
"What nonsense! Much I need it!" said Rostov, throwing the letter under the
table.
"Why have you thrown that away?" asked Boris.
"It is some letter of recommendation... what the devil do I want it for!"
"Why 'What the devil'?" said Boris, picking it up and reading the address.
"This letter would be of great use to you."
"I want nothing, and I won't be anyone's adjutant."
"Why not?" inquired Boris.
"It's a lackey's job!"
"You are still the same dreamer, I see," remarked Boris, shaking his head.
"And you're still the same diplomatist! But that's not the point... Come, how
are you?" asked Rostov.
"Well, as you see. So far everything's all right, but I confess I should much
like to be an adjutant and not remain at the front."
"Why?"
"Because when once a man starts on military service, he should try to make as
successful a career of it as possible."
"Oh, that's it!" said Rostov, evidently thinking of something else.
He looked intently and inquiringly into his friend's eyes, evidently trying in
vain to find the answer to some question.
Old Gabriel brought in the wine.
"Shouldn't we now send for Berg?" asked Boris. "He would drink with you. I
can't."
"Well, send for him... and how do you get on with that German?" asked
Rostov, with a contemptuous smile.
"He is a very, very nice, honest, and pleasant fellow," answered Boris.
Again Rostov looked intently into Boris' eyes and sighed. Berg returned, and
over the bottle of wine conversation between the three officers became
animated. The Guardsmen told Rostov of their march and how they had been
made much of in Russia, Poland, and abroad. They spoke of the sayings and
doings of their commander, the Grand Duke, and told stories of his kindness
and irascibility. Berg, as usual, kept silent when the subject did not relate to
himself, but in connection with the stories of the Grand Duke's quick temper
he related with gusto how in Galicia he had managed to deal with the Grand
Duke when the latter made a tour of the regiments and was annoyed at the
irregularity of a movement. With a pleasant smile Berg related how the Grand
Duke had ridden up to him in a violent passion, shouting: "Arnauts!"
("Arnauts" was the Tsarevich's favorite expression when he was in a rage) and
called for the company commander.
"Would you believe it, Count, I was not at all alarmed, because I knew I was
right. Without boasting, you know, I may say that I know the Army Orders by
heart and know the Regulations as well as I do the Lord's Prayer. So, Count,
there never is any negligence in my company, and so my conscience was at
ease. I came forward...." (Berg stood up and showed how he presented
himself, with his hand to his cap, and really it would have been difficult for a
face to express greater respect and self-complacency than his did.) "Well, he
stormed at me, as the saying is, stormed and stormed and stormed! It was not a
matter of life but rather of death, as the saying is. 'Albanians!' and 'devils!' and
'To Siberia!'" said Berg with a sagacious smile. "I knew I was in the right so I
kept silent; was not that best, Count?... 'Hey, are you dumb?' he shouted. Still I
remained silent. And what do you think, Count? The next day it was not even
mentioned in the Orders of the Day. That's what keeping one's head means.
That's the way, Count," said Berg, lighting his pipe and emitting rings of
smoke.
"Yes, that was fine," said Rostov, smiling.
But Boris noticed that he was preparing to make fun of Berg, and skillfully
changed the subject. He asked him to tell them how and where he got his
wound. This pleased Rostov and he began talking about it, and as he went on
became more and more animated. He told them of his Schon Grabern affair,
just as those who have taken part in a battle generally do describe it, that is, as
they would like it to have been, as they have heard it described by others, and
as sounds well, but not at all as it really was. Rostov was a truthful young man
and would on no account have told a deliberate lie. He began his story
meaning to tell everything just as it happened, but imperceptibly, involuntarily,
and inevitably he lapsed into falsehood. If he had told the truth to his hearers
—who like himself had often heard stories of attacks and had formed a
definite idea of what an attack was and were expecting to hear just such a
story—they would either not have believed him or, still worse, would have
thought that Rostov was himself to blame since what generally happens to the
narrators of cavalry attacks had not happened to him. He could not tell them
simply that everyone went at a trot and that he fell off his horse and sprained
his arm and then ran as hard as he could from a Frenchman into the wood.
Besides, to tell everything as it really happened, it would have been necessary
to make an effort of will to tell only what happened. It is very difficult to tell
the truth, and young people are rarely capable of it. His hearers expected a
story of how beside himself and all aflame with excitement, he had flown like
a storm at the square, cut his way in, slashed right and left, how his saber had
tasted flesh and he had fallen exhausted, and so on. And so he told them all
that.
In the middle of his story, just as he was saying: "You cannot imagine what a
strange frenzy one experiences during an attack," Prince Andrew, whom Boris
was expecting, entered the room. Prince Andrew, who liked to help young
men, was flattered by being asked for his assistance and being well disposed
toward Boris, who had managed to please him the day before, he wished to do
what the young man wanted. Having been sent with papers from Kutuzov to
the Tsarevich, he looked in on Boris, hoping to find him alone. When he came
in and saw an hussar of the line recounting his military exploits (Prince
Andrew could not endure that sort of man), he gave Boris a pleasant smile,
frowned as with half-closed eyes he looked at Rostov, bowed slightly and
wearily, and sat down languidly on the sofa: he felt it unpleasant to have
dropped in on bad company. Rostov flushed up on noticing this, but he did not
care, this was a mere stranger. Glancing, however, at Boris, he saw that he too
seemed ashamed of the hussar of the line.
In spite of Prince Andrew's disagreeable, ironical tone, in spite of the
contempt with which Rostov, from his fighting army point of view, regarded
all these little adjutants on the staff of whom the newcomer was evidently one,
Rostov felt confused, blushed, and became silent. Boris inquired what news
there might be on the staff, and what, without indiscretion, one might ask
about our plans.
"We shall probably advance," replied Bolkonski, evidently reluctant to say
more in the presence of a stranger.
Berg took the opportunity to ask, with great politeness, whether, as was
rumored, the allowance of forage money to captains of companies would be
doubled. To this Prince Andrew answered with a smile that he could give no
opinion on such an important government order, and Berg laughed gaily.
"As to your business," Prince Andrew continued, addressing Boris, "we will
talk of it later" (and he looked round at Rostov). "Come to me after the review
and we will do what is possible."
And, having glanced round the room, Prince Andrew turned to Rostov, whose
state of unconquerable childish embarrassment now changing to anger he did
not condescend to notice, and said: "I think you were talking of the Schon
Grabern affair? Were you there?"
"I was there," said Rostov angrily, as if intending to insult the aide-de-camp.
Bolkonski noticed the hussar's state of mind, and it amused him. With a
slightly contemptuous smile, he said: "Yes, there are many stories now told
about that affair!"
"Yes, stories!" repeated Rostov loudly, looking with eyes suddenly grown
furious, now at Boris, now at Bolkonski. "Yes, many stories! But our stories
are the stories of men who have been under the enemy's fire! Our stories have
some weight, not like the stories of those fellows on the staff who get rewards
without doing anything!"
"Of whom you imagine me to be one?" said Prince Andrew, with a quiet and
particularly amiable smile.
A strange feeling of exasperation and yet of respect for this man's selfpossession mingled at that moment in Rostov's soul.
"I am not talking about you," he said, "I don't know you and, frankly, I don't
want to. I am speaking of the staff in general."
"And I will tell you this," Prince Andrew interrupted in a tone of quiet
authority, "you wish to insult me, and I am ready to agree with you that it
would be very easy to do so if you haven't sufficient self-respect, but admit
that the time and place are very badly chosen. In a day or two we shall all have
to take part in a greater and more serious duel, and besides, Drubetskoy, who
says he is an old friend of yours, is not at all to blame that my face has the
misfortune to displease you. However," he added rising, "you know my name
and where to find me, but don't forget that I do not regard either myself or you
as having been at all insulted, and as a man older than you, my advice is to let
the matter drop. Well then, on Friday after the review I shall expect you,
Drubetskoy. Au revoir!" exclaimed Prince Andrew, and with a bow to them
both he went out.
Only when Prince Andrew was gone did Rostov think of what he ought to
have said. And he was still more angry at having omitted to say it. He ordered
his horse at once and, coldly taking leave of Boris, rode home. Should he go to
headquarters next day and challenge that affected adjutant, or really let the
matter drop, was the question that worried him all the way. He thought angrily
of the pleasure he would have at seeing the fright of that small and frail but
proud man when covered by his pistol, and then he felt with surprise that of all
the men he knew there was none he would so much like to have for a friend as
that very adjutant whom he so hated.
CHAPTER VIII
The day after Rostov had been to see Boris, a review was held of the Austrian
and Russian troops, both those freshly arrived from Russia and those who had
been campaigning under Kutuzov. The two Emperors, the Russian with his
heir the Tsarevich, and the Austrian with the Archduke, inspected the allied
army of eighty thousand men.
From early morning the smart clean troops were on the move, forming up on
the field before the fortress. Now thousands of feet and bayonets moved and
halted at the officers' command, turned with banners flying, formed up at
intervals, and wheeled round other similar masses of infantry in different
uniforms; now was heard the rhythmic beat of hoofs and the jingling of showy
cavalry in blue, red, and green braided uniforms, with smartly dressed
bandsmen in front mounted on black, roan, or gray horses; then again,
spreading out with the brazen clatter of the polished shining cannon that
quivered on the gun carriages and with the smell of linstocks, came the
artillery which crawled between the infantry and cavalry and took up its
appointed position. Not only the generals in full parade uniforms, with their
thin or thick waists drawn in to the utmost, their red necks squeezed into their
stiff collars, and wearing scarves and all their decorations, not only the
elegant, pomaded officers, but every soldier with his freshly washed and
shaven face and his weapons clean and polished to the utmost, and every horse
groomed till its coat shone like satin and every hair of its wetted mane lay
smooth—felt that no small matter was happening, but an important and
solemn affair. Every general and every soldier was conscious of his own
insignificance, aware of being but a drop in that ocean of men, and yet at the
same time was conscious of his strength as a part of that enormous whole.
From early morning strenuous activities and efforts had begun and by ten
o'clock all had been brought into due order. The ranks were drawn up on the
vast field. The whole army was extended in three lines: the cavalry in front,
behind it the artillery, and behind that again the infantry.
A space like a street was left between each two lines of troops. The three parts
of that army were sharply distinguished: Kutuzov's fighting army (with the
Pavlograds on the right flank of the front); those recently arrived from Russia,
both Guards and regiments of the line; and the Austrian troops. But they all
stood in the same lines, under one command, and in a like order.
Like wind over leaves ran an excited whisper: "They're coming! They're
coming!" Alarmed voices were heard, and a stir of final preparation swept
over all the troops.
From the direction of Olmutz in front of them, a group was seen approaching.
And at that moment, though the day was still, a light gust of wind blowing
over the army slightly stirred the streamers on the lances and the unfolded
standards fluttered against their staffs. It looked as if by that slight motion the
army itself was expressing its joy at the approach of the Emperors. One voice
was heard shouting: "Eyes front!" Then, like the crowing of cocks at sunrise,
this was repeated by others from various sides and all became silent.
In the deathlike stillness only the tramp of horses was heard. This was the
Emperors' suites. The Emperors rode up to the flank, and the trumpets of the
first cavalry regiment played the general march. It seemed as though not the
trumpeters were playing, but as if the army itself, rejoicing at the Emperors'
approach, had naturally burst into music. Amid these sounds, only the youthful
kindly voice of the Emperor Alexander was clearly heard. He gave the words
of greeting, and the first regiment roared "Hurrah!" so deafeningly,
continuously, and joyfully that the men themselves were awed by their
multitude and the immensity of the power they constituted.
Rostov, standing in the front lines of Kutuzov's army which the Tsar
approached first, experienced the same feeling as every other man in that
army: a feeling of self-forgetfulness, a proud consciousness of might, and a
passionate attraction to him who was the cause of this triumph.
He felt that at a single word from that man all this vast mass (and he himself
an insignificant atom in it) would go through fire and water, commit crime,
die, or perform deeds of highest heroism, and so he could not but tremble and
his heart stand still at the imminence of that word.
"Hurrah! Hurrah! Hurrah!" thundered from all sides, one regiment after
another greeting the Tsar with the strains of the march, and then "Hurrah!"...
Then the general march, and again "Hurrah! Hurrah!" growing ever stronger
and fuller and merging into a deafening roar.
Till the Tsar reached it, each regiment in its silence and immobility seemed
like a lifeless body, but as soon as he came up it became alive, its thunder
joining the roar of the whole line along which he had already passed. Through
the terrible and deafening roar of those voices, amid the square masses of
troops standing motionless as if turned to stone, hundreds of riders composing
the suites moved carelessly but symmetrically and above all freely, and in
front of them two men—the Emperors. Upon them the undivided, tensely
passionate attention of that whole mass of men was concentrated.
The handsome young Emperor Alexander, in the uniform of the Horse Guards,
wearing a cocked hat with its peaks front and back, with his pleasant face and
resonant though not loud voice, attracted everyone's attention.
Rostov was not far from the trumpeters, and with his keen sight had
recognized the Tsar and watched his approach. When he was within twenty
paces, and Nicholas could clearly distinguish every detail of his handsome,
happy young face, he experienced a feeling of tenderness and ecstasy such as
he had never before known. Every trait and every movement of the Tsar's
seemed to him enchanting.
Stopping in front of the Pavlograds, the Tsar said something in French to the
Austrian Emperor and smiled.
Seeing that smile, Rostov involuntarily smiled himself and felt a still stronger
flow of love for his sovereign. He longed to show that love in some way and
knowing that this was impossible was ready to cry. The Tsar called the colonel
of the regiment and said a few words to him.
"Oh God, what would happen to me if the Emperor spoke to me?" thought
Rostov. "I should die of happiness!"
The Tsar addressed the officers also: "I thank you all, gentlemen, I thank you
with my whole heart." To Rostov every word sounded like a voice from
heaven. How gladly would he have died at once for his Tsar!
"You have earned the St. George's standards and will be worthy of them."
"Oh, to die, to die for him," thought Rostov.
The Tsar said something more which Rostov did not hear, and the soldiers,
straining their lungs, shouted "Hurrah!"
Rostov too, bending over his saddle, shouted "Hurrah!" with all his might,
feeling that he would like to injure himself by that shout, if only to express his
rapture fully.
The Tsar stopped a few minutes in front of the hussars as if undecided.
"How can the Emperor be undecided?" thought Rostov, but then even this
indecision appeared to him majestic and enchanting, like everything else the
Tsar did.
That hesitation lasted only an instant. The Tsar's foot, in the narrow pointed
boot then fashionable, touched the groin of the bobtailed bay mare he rode, his
hand in a white glove gathered up the reins, and he moved off accompanied by
an irregularly swaying sea of aides-de-camp. Farther and farther he rode away,
stopping at other regiments, till at last only his white plumes were visible to
Rostov from amid the suites that surrounded the Emperors.
Among the gentlemen of the suite, Rostov noticed Bolkonski, sitting his horse
indolently and carelessly. Rostov recalled their quarrel of yesterday and the
question presented itself whether he ought or ought not to challenge
Bolkonski. "Of course not!" he now thought. "Is it worth thinking or speaking
of it at such a moment? At a time of such love, such rapture, and such selfsacrifice, what do any of our quarrels and affronts matter? I love and forgive
everybody now."
When the Emperor had passed nearly all the regiments, the troops began a
ceremonial march past him, and Rostov on Bedouin, recently purchased from
Denisov, rode past too, at the rear of his squadron—that is, alone and in full
view of the Emperor.
Before he reached him, Rostov, who was a splendid horseman, spurred
Bedouin twice and successfully put him to the showy trot in which the animal
went when excited. Bending his foaming muzzle to his chest, his tail extended,
Bedouin, as if also conscious of the Emperor's eye upon him, passed
splendidly, lifting his feet with a high and graceful action, as if flying through
the air without touching the ground.
Rostov himself, his legs well back and his stomach drawn in and feeling
himself one with his horse, rode past the Emperor with a frowning but blissful
face "like a vewy devil," as Denisov expressed it.
"Fine fellows, the Pavlograds!" remarked the Emperor.
"My God, how happy I should be if he ordered me to leap into the fire this
instant!" thought Rostov.
When the review was over, the newly arrived officers, and also Kutuzov's,
collected in groups and began to talk about the awards, about the Austrians
and their uniforms, about their lines, about Bonaparte, and how badly the latter
would fare now, especially if the Essen corps arrived and Prussia took our
side.
But the talk in every group was chiefly about the Emperor Alexander. His
every word and movement was described with ecstasy.
They all had but one wish: to advance as soon as possible against the enemy
under the Emperor's command. Commanded by the Emperor himself they
could not fail to vanquish anyone, be it whom it might: so thought Rostov and
most of the officers after the review.
All were then more confident of victory than the winning of two battles would
have made them.
CHAPTER IX
The day after the review, Boris, in his best uniform and with his comrade
Berg's best wishes for success, rode to Olmutz to see Bolkonski, wishing to
profit by his friendliness and obtain for himself the best post he could—
preferably that of adjutant to some important personage, a position in the army
which seemed to him most attractive. "It is all very well for Rostov, whose
father sends him ten thousand rubles at a time, to talk about not wishing to
cringe to anybody and not be anyone's lackey, but I who have nothing but my
brains have to make a career and must not miss opportunities, but must avail
myself of them!" he reflected.
He did not find Prince Andrew in Olmutz that day, but the appearance of the
town where the headquarters and the diplomatic corps were stationed and the
two Emperors were living with their suites, households, and courts only
strengthened his desire to belong to that higher world.
He knew no one, and despite his smart Guardsman's uniform, all these exalted
personages passing in the streets in their elegant carriages with their plumes,
ribbons, and medals, both courtiers and military men, seemed so
immeasurably above him, an insignificant officer of the Guards, that they not
only did not wish to, but simply could not, be aware of his existence. At the
quarters of the commander-in-chief, Kutuzov, where he inquired for
Bolkonski, all the adjutants and even the orderlies looked at him as if they
wished to impress on him that a great many officers like him were always
coming there and that everybody was heartily sick of them. In spite of this, or
rather because of it, next day, November 15, after dinner he again went to
Olmutz and, entering the house occupied by Kutuzov, asked for Bolkonski.
Prince Andrew was in and Boris was shown into a large hall probably
formerly used for dancing, but in which five beds now stood, and furniture of
various kinds: a table, chairs, and a clavichord. One adjutant, nearest the door,
was sitting at the table in a Persian dressing gown, writing. Another, the red,
stout Nesvitski, lay on a bed with his arms under his head, laughing with an
officer who had sat down beside him. A third was playing a Viennese waltz on
the clavichord, while a fourth, lying on the clavichord, sang the tune.
Bolkonski was not there. None of these gentlemen changed his position on
seeing Boris. The one who was writing and whom Boris addressed turned
round crossly and told him Bolkonski was on duty and that he should go
through the door on the left into the reception room if he wished to see him.
Boris thanked him and went to the reception room, where he found some ten
officers and generals.
When he entered, Prince Andrew, his eyes drooping contemptuously (with that
peculiar expression of polite weariness which plainly says, "If it were not my
duty I would not talk to you for a moment"), was listening to an old Russian
general with decorations, who stood very erect, almost on tiptoe, with a
soldier's obsequious expression on his purple face, reporting something.
"Very well, then, be so good as to wait," said Prince Andrew to the general, in
Russian, speaking with the French intonation he affected when he wished to
speak contemptuously, and noticing Boris, Prince Andrew, paying no more
heed to the general who ran after him imploring him to hear something more,
nodded and turned to him with a cheerful smile.
At that moment Boris clearly realized what he had before surmised, that in the
army, besides the subordination and discipline prescribed in the military code,
which he and the others knew in the regiment, there was another, more
important, subordination, which made this tight-laced, purple-faced general
wait respectfully while Captain Prince Andrew, for his own pleasure, chose to
chat with Lieutenant Drubetskoy. More than ever was Boris resolved to serve
in future not according to the written code, but under this unwritten law. He
felt now that merely by having been recommended to Prince Andrew he had
already risen above the general who at the front had the power to annihilate
him, a lieutenant of the Guards. Prince Andrew came up to him and took his
hand.
"I am very sorry you did not find me in yesterday. I was fussing about with
Germans all day. We went with Weyrother to survey the dispositions. When
Germans start being accurate, there's no end to it!"
Boris smiled, as if he understood what Prince Andrew was alluding to as
something generally known. But it was the first time he had heard Weyrother's
name, or even the term "dispositions."
"Well, my dear fellow, so you still want to be an adjutant? I have been
thinking about you."
"Yes, I was thinking"—for some reason Boris could not help blushing—"of
asking the commander-in-chief. He has had a letter from Prince Kuragin about
me. I only wanted to ask because I fear the Guards won't be in action," he
added as if in apology.
"All right, all right. We'll talk it over," replied Prince Andrew. "Only let me
report this gentleman's business, and I shall be at your disposal."
While Prince Andrew went to report about the purple-faced general, that
gentleman—evidently not sharing Boris' conception of the advantages of the
unwritten code of subordination—looked so fixedly at the presumptuous
lieutenant who had prevented his finishing what he had to say to the adjutant
that Boris felt uncomfortable. He turned away and waited impatiently for
Prince Andrew's return from the commander-in-chief's room.
"You see, my dear fellow, I have been thinking about you," said Prince
Andrew when they had gone into the large room where the clavichord was.
"It's no use your going to the commander-in-chief. He would say a lot of
pleasant things, ask you to dinner" ("That would not be bad as regards the
unwritten code," thought Boris), "but nothing more would come of it. There
will soon be a battalion of us aides-de-camp and adjutants! But this is what
we'll do: I have a good friend, an adjutant general and an excellent fellow,
Prince Dolgorukov; and though you may not know it, the fact is that now
Kutuzov with his staff and all of us count for nothing. Everything is now
centered round the Emperor. So we will go to Dolgorukov; I have to go there
anyhow and I have already spoken to him about you. We shall see whether he
cannot attach you to himself or find a place for you somewhere nearer the
sun."
Prince Andrew always became specially keen when he had to guide a young
man and help him to worldly success. Under cover of obtaining help of this
kind for another, which from pride he would never accept for himself, he kept
in touch with the circle which confers success and which attracted him. He
very readily took up Boris' cause and went with him to Dolgorukov.
It was late in the evening when they entered the palace at Olmutz occupied by
the Emperors and their retinues.
That same day a council of war had been held in which all the members of the
Hofkriegsrath and both Emperors took part. At that council, contrary to the
views of the old generals Kutuzov and Prince Schwartzenberg, it had been
decided to advance immediately and give battle to Bonaparte. The council of
war was just over when Prince Andrew accompanied by Boris arrived at the
palace to find Dolgorukov. Everyone at headquarters was still under the spell
of the day's council, at which the party of the young had triumphed. The
voices of those who counseled delay and advised waiting for something else
before advancing had been so completely silenced and their arguments
confuted by such conclusive evidence of the advantages of attacking that what
had been discussed at the council—the coming battle and the victory that
would certainly result from it—no longer seemed to be in the future but in the
past. All the advantages were on our side. Our enormous forces, undoubtedly
superior to Napoleon's, were concentrated in one place, the troops inspired by
the Emperors' presence were eager for action. The strategic position where the
operations would take place was familiar in all its details to the Austrian
General Weyrother: a lucky accident had ordained that the Austrian army
should maneuver the previous year on the very fields where the French had
now to be fought; the adjacent locality was known and shown in every detail
on the maps, and Bonaparte, evidently weakened, was undertaking nothing.
Dolgorukov, one of the warmest advocates of an attack, had just returned from
the council, tired and exhausted but eager and proud of the victory that had
been gained. Prince Andrew introduced his protege, but Prince Dolgorukov
politely and firmly pressing his hand said nothing to Boris and, evidently
unable to suppress the thoughts which were uppermost in his mind at that
moment, addressed Prince Andrew in French.
"Ah, my dear fellow, what a battle we have gained! God grant that the one that
will result from it will be as victorious! However, dear fellow," he said
abruptly and eagerly, "I must confess to having been unjust to the Austrians
and especially to Weyrother. What exactitude, what minuteness, what
knowledge of the locality, what foresight for every eventuality, every
possibility even to the smallest detail! No, my dear fellow, no conditions better
than our present ones could have been devised. This combination of Austrian
precision with Russian valor—what more could be wished for?"
"So the attack is definitely resolved on?" asked Bolkonski.
"And do you know, my dear fellow, it seems to me that Bonaparte has
decidedly lost bearings, you know that a letter was received from him today
for the Emperor." Dolgorukov smiled significantly.
"Is that so? And what did he say?" inquired Bolkonski.
"What can he say? Tra-di-ri-di-ra and so on... merely to gain time. I tell you he
is in our hands, that's certain! But what was most amusing," he continued, with
a sudden, good-natured laugh, "was that we could not think how to address the
reply! If not as 'Consul' and of course not as 'Emperor,' it seemed to me it
should be to 'General Bonaparte.'"
"But between not recognizing him as Emperor and calling him General
Bonaparte, there is a difference," remarked Bolkonski.
"That's just it," interrupted Dolgorukov quickly, laughing. "You know Bilibin
—he's a very clever fellow. He suggested addressing him as 'Usurper and
Enemy of Mankind.'"
Dolgorukov laughed merrily.
"Only that?" said Bolkonski.
"All the same, it was Bilibin who found a suitable form for the address. He is a
wise and clever fellow."
"What was it?"
"To the Head of the French Government... Au chef du gouvernement francais,"
said Dolgorukov, with grave satisfaction. "Good, wasn't it?"
"Yes, but he will dislike it extremely," said Bolkonski.
"Oh yes, very much! My brother knows him, he's dined with him—the present
Emperor—more than once in Paris, and tells me he never met a more cunning
or subtle diplomatist—you know, a combination of French adroitness and
Italian play-acting! Do you know the tale about him and Count Markov?
Count Markov was the only man who knew how to handle him. You know the
story of the handkerchief? It is delightful!"
And the talkative Dolgorukov, turning now to Boris, now to Prince Andrew,
told how Bonaparte wishing to test Markov, our ambassador, purposely
dropped a handkerchief in front of him and stood looking at Markov, probably
expecting Markov to pick it up for him, and how Markov immediately
dropped his own beside it and picked it up without touching Bonaparte's.
"Delightful!" said Bolkonski. "But I have come to you, Prince, as a petitioner
on behalf of this young man. You see..." but before Prince Andrew could
finish, an aide-de-camp came in to summon Dolgorukov to the Emperor.
"Oh, what a nuisance," said Dolgorukov, getting up hurriedly and pressing the
hands of Prince Andrew and Boris. "You know I should be very glad to do all
in my power both for you and for this dear young man." Again he pressed the
hand of the latter with an expression of good-natured, sincere, and animated
levity. "But you see... another time!"
Boris was excited by the thought of being so close to the higher powers as he
felt himself to be at that moment. He was conscious that here he was in contact
with the springs that set in motion the enormous movements of the mass of
which in his regiment he felt himself a tiny, obedient, and insignificant atom.
They followed Prince Dolgorukov out into the corridor and met—coming out
of the door of the Emperor's room by which Dolgorukov had entered—a short
man in civilian clothes with a clever face and sharply projecting jaw which,
without spoiling his face, gave him a peculiar vivacity and shiftiness of
expression. This short man nodded to Dolgorukov as to an intimate friend and
stared at Prince Andrew with cool intensity, walking straight toward him and
evidently expecting him to bow or to step out of his way. Prince Andrew did
neither: a look of animosity appeared on his face and the other turned away
and went down the side of the corridor.
"Who was that?" asked Boris.
"He is one of the most remarkable, but to me most unpleasant of men—the
Minister of Foreign Affairs, Prince Adam Czartoryski.... It is such men as he
who decide the fate of nations," added Bolkonski with a sigh he could not
suppress, as they passed out of the palace.
Next day, the army began its campaign, and up to the very battle of Austerlitz,
Boris was unable to see either Prince Andrew or Dolgorukov again and
remained for a while with the Ismaylov regiment.
CHAPTER X
At dawn on the sixteenth of November, Denisov's squadron, in which Nicholas
Rostov served and which was in Prince Bagration's detachment, moved from
the place where it had spent the night, advancing into action as arranged, and
after going behind other columns for about two thirds of a mile was stopped
on the highroad. Rostov saw the Cossacks and then the first and second
squadrons of hussars and infantry battalions and artillery pass by and go
forward and then Generals Bagration and Dolgorukov ride past with their
adjutants. All the fear before action which he had experienced as previously,
all the inner struggle to conquer that fear, all his dreams of distinguishing
himself as a true hussar in this battle, had been wasted. Their squadron
remained in reserve and Nicholas Rostov spent that day in a dull and wretched
mood. At nine in the morning, he heard firing in front and shouts of hurrah,
and saw wounded being brought back (there were not many of them), and at
last he saw how a whole detachment of French cavalry was brought in,
convoyed by a sotnya of Cossacks. Evidently the affair was over and, though
not big, had been a successful engagement. The men and officers returning
spoke of a brilliant victory, of the occupation of the town of Wischau and the
capture of a whole French squadron. The day was bright and sunny after a
sharp night frost, and the cheerful glitter of that autumn day was in keeping
with the news of victory which was conveyed, not only by the tales of those
who had taken part in it, but also by the joyful expression on the faces of
soldiers, officers, generals, and adjutants, as they passed Rostov going or
coming. And Nicholas, who had vainly suffered all the dread that precedes a
battle and had spent that happy day in inactivity, was all the more depressed.
"Come here, Wostov. Let's dwink to dwown our gwief!" shouted Denisov, who
had settled down by the roadside with a flask and some food.
The officers gathered round Denisov's canteen, eating and talking.
"There! They are bringing another!" cried one of the officers, indicating a
captive French dragoon who was being brought in on foot by two Cossacks.
One of them was leading by the bridle a fine large French horse he had taken
from the prisoner.
"Sell us that horse!" Denisov called out to the Cossacks.
"If you like, your honor!"
The officers got up and stood round the Cossacks and their prisoner. The
French dragoon was a young Alsatian who spoke French with a German
accent. He was breathless with agitation, his face was red, and when he heard
some French spoken he at once began speaking to the officers, addressing first
one, then another. He said he would not have been taken, it was not his fault
but the corporal's who had sent him to seize some horsecloths, though he had
told him the Russians were there. And at every word he added: "But don't hurt
my little horse!" and stroked the animal. It was plain that he did not quite
grasp where he was. Now he excused himself for having been taken prisoner
and now, imagining himself before his own officers, insisted on his soldierly
discipline and zeal in the service. He brought with him into our rearguard all
the freshness of atmosphere of the French army, which was so alien to us.
The Cossacks sold the horse for two gold pieces, and Rostov, being the richest
of the officers now that he had received his money, bought it.
"But don't hurt my little horse!" said the Alsatian good-naturedly to Rostov
when the animal was handed over to the hussar.
Rostov smilingly reassured the dragoon and gave him money.
"Alley! Alley!" said the Cossack, touching the prisoner's arm to make him go
on.
"The Emperor! The Emperor!" was suddenly heard among the hussars.
All began to run and bustle, and Rostov saw coming up the road behind him
several riders with white plumes in their hats. In a moment everyone was in
his place, waiting.
Rostov did not know or remember how he ran to his place and mounted.
Instantly his regret at not having been in action and his dejected mood amid
people of whom he was weary had gone, instantly every thought of himself
had vanished. He was filled with happiness at his nearness to the Emperor. He
felt that this nearness by itself made up to him for the day he had lost. He was
happy as a lover when the longed-for moment of meeting arrives. Not daring
to look round and without looking round, he was ecstatically conscious of his
approach. He felt it not only from the sound of the hoofs of the approaching
cavalcade, but because as he drew near everything grew brighter, more joyful,
more significant, and more festive around him. Nearer and nearer to Rostov
came that sun shedding beams of mild and majestic light around, and already
he felt himself enveloped in those beams, he heard his voice, that kindly, calm,
and majestic voice that was yet so simple! And as if in accord with Rostov's
feeling, there was a deathly stillness amid which was heard the Emperor's
voice.
"The Pavlograd hussars?" he inquired.
"The reserves, sire!" replied a voice, a very human one compared to that which
had said: "The Pavlograd hussars?"
The Emperor drew level with Rostov and halted. Alexander's face was even
more beautiful than it had been three days before at the review. It shone with
such gaiety and youth, such innocent youth, that it suggested the liveliness of a
fourteen-year-old boy, and yet it was the face of the majestic Emperor.
Casually, while surveying the squadron, the Emperor's eyes met Rostov's and
rested on them for not more than two seconds. Whether or no the Emperor
understood what was going on in Rostov's soul (it seemed to Rostov that he
understood everything), at any rate his light-blue eyes gazed for about two
seconds into Rostov's face. A gentle, mild light poured from them. Then all at
once he raised his eyebrows, abruptly touched his horse with his left foot, and
galloped on.
The younger Emperor could not restrain his wish to be present at the battle
and, in spite of the remonstrances of his courtiers, at twelve o'clock left the
third column with which he had been and galloped toward the vanguard.
Before he came up with the hussars, several adjutants met him with news of
the successful result of the action.
This battle, which consisted in the capture of a French squadron, was
represented as a brilliant victory over the French, and so the Emperor and the
whole army, especially while the smoke hung over the battlefield, believed
that the French had been defeated and were retreating against their will. A few
minutes after the Emperor had passed, the Pavlograd division was ordered to
advance. In Wischau itself, a petty German town, Rostov saw the Emperor
again. In the market place, where there had been some rather heavy firing
before the Emperor's arrival, lay several killed and wounded soldiers whom
there had not been time to move. The Emperor, surrounded by his suite of
officers and courtiers, was riding a bobtailed chestnut mare, a different one
from that which he had ridden at the review, and bending to one side he
gracefully held a gold lorgnette to his eyes and looked at a soldier who lay
prone, with blood on his uncovered head. The wounded soldier was so dirty,
coarse, and revolting that his proximity to the Emperor shocked Rostov.
Rostov saw how the Emperor's rather round shoulders shuddered as if a cold
shiver had run down them, how his left foot began convulsively tapping the
horse's side with the spur, and how the well-trained horse looked round
unconcerned and did not stir. An adjutant, dismounting, lifted the soldier under
the arms to place him on a stretcher that had been brought. The soldier
groaned.
"Gently, gently! Can't you do it more gently?" said the Emperor apparently
suffering more than the dying soldier, and he rode away.
Rostov saw tears filling the Emperor's eyes and heard him, as he was riding
away, say to Czartoryski: "What a terrible thing war is: what a terrible thing!
Quelle terrible chose que la guerre!"
The troops of the vanguard were stationed before Wischau, within sight of the
enemy's lines, which all day long had yielded ground to us at the least firing.
The Emperor's gratitude was announced to the vanguard, rewards were
promised, and the men received a double ration of vodka. The campfires
crackled and the soldiers' songs resounded even more merrily than on the
previous night. Denisov celebrated his promotion to the rank of major, and
Rostov, who had already drunk enough, at the end of the feast proposed the
Emperor's health. "Not 'our Sovereign, the Emperor,' as they say at official
dinners," said he, "but the health of our Sovereign, that good, enchanting, and
great man! Let us drink to his health and to the certain defeat of the French!"
"If we fought before," he said, "not letting the French pass, as at Schon
Grabern, what shall we not do now when he is at the front? We will all die for
him gladly! Is it not so, gentlemen? Perhaps I am not saying it right, I have
drunk a good deal—but that is how I feel, and so do you too! To the health of
Alexander the First! Hurrah!"
"Hurrah!" rang the enthusiastic voices of the officers.
And the old cavalry captain, Kirsten, shouted enthusiastically and no less
sincerely than the twenty-year-old Rostov.
When the officers had emptied and smashed their glasses, Kirsten filled others
and, in shirt sleeves and breeches, went glass in hand to the soldiers' bonfires
and with his long gray mustache, his white chest showing under his open shirt,
he stood in a majestic pose in the light of the campfire, waving his uplifted
arm.
"Lads! here's to our Sovereign, the Emperor, and victory over our enemies!
Hurrah!" he exclaimed in his dashing, old, hussar's baritone.
The hussars crowded round and responded heartily with loud shouts.
Late that night, when all had separated, Denisov with his short hand patted his
favorite, Rostov, on the shoulder.
"As there's no one to fall in love with on campaign, he's fallen in love with the
Tsar," he said.
"Denisov, don't make fun of it!" cried Rostov. "It is such a lofty, beautiful
feeling, such a..."
"I believe it, I believe it, fwiend, and I share and appwove..."
"No, you don't understand!"
And Rostov got up and went wandering among the campfires, dreaming of
what happiness it would be to die—not in saving the Emperor's life (he did not
even dare to dream of that), but simply to die before his eyes. He really was in
love with the Tsar and the glory of the Russian arms and the hope of future
triumph. And he was not the only man to experience that feeling during those
memorable days preceding the battle of Austerlitz: nine tenths of the men in
the Russian army were then in love, though less ecstatically, with their Tsar
and the glory of the Russian arms.
CHAPTER XI
The next day the Emperor stopped at Wischau, and Villier, his physician, was
repeatedly summoned to see him. At headquarters and among the troops near
by the news spread that the Emperor was unwell. He ate nothing and had slept
badly that night, those around him reported. The cause of this indisposition
was the strong impression made on his sensitive mind by the sight of the killed
and wounded.
At daybreak on the seventeenth, a French officer who had come with a flag of
truce, demanding an audience with the Russian Emperor, was brought into
Wischau from our outposts. This officer was Savary. The Emperor had only
just fallen asleep and so Savary had to wait. At midday he was admitted to the
Emperor, and an hour later he rode off with Prince Dolgorukov to the
advanced post of the French army.
It was rumored that Savary had been sent to propose to Alexander a meeting
with Napoleon. To the joy and pride of the whole army, a personal interview
was refused, and instead of the Sovereign, Prince Dolgorukov, the victor at
Wischau, was sent with Savary to negotiate with Napoleon if, contrary to
expectations, these negotiations were actuated by a real desire for peace.
Toward evening Dolgorukov came back, went straight to the Tsar, and
remained alone with him for a long time.
On the eighteenth and nineteenth of November, the army advanced two days'
march and the enemy's outposts after a brief interchange of shots retreated. In
the highest army circles from midday on the nineteenth, a great, excitedly
bustling activity began which lasted till the morning of the twentieth, when the
memorable battle of Austerlitz was fought.
Till midday on the nineteenth, the activity—the eager talk, running to and fro,
and dispatching of adjutants—was confined to the Emperor's headquarters.
But on the afternoon of that day, this activity reached Kutuzov's headquarters
and the staffs of the commanders of columns. By evening, the adjutants had
spread it to all ends and parts of the army, and in the night from the nineteenth
to the twentieth, the whole eighty thousand allied troops rose from their
bivouacs to the hum of voices, and the army swayed and started in one
enormous mass six miles long.
The concentrated activity which had begun at the Emperor's headquarters in
the morning and had started the whole movement that followed was like the
first movement of the main wheel of a large tower clock. One wheel slowly
moved, another was set in motion, and a third, and wheels began to revolve
faster and faster, levers and cogwheels to work, chimes to play, figures to pop
out, and the hands to advance with regular motion as a result of all that
activity.
Just as in the mechanism of a clock, so in the mechanism of the military
machine, an impulse once given leads to the final result; and just as
indifferently quiescent till the moment when motion is transmitted to them are
the parts of the mechanism which the impulse has not yet reached. Wheels
creak on their axles as the cogs engage one another and the revolving pulleys
whirr with the rapidity of their movement, but a neighboring wheel is as quiet
and motionless as though it were prepared to remain so for a hundred years;
but the moment comes when the lever catches it and obeying the impulse that
wheel begins to creak and joins in the common motion the result and aim of
which are beyond its ken.
Just as in a clock, the result of the complicated motion of innumerable wheels
and pulleys is merely a slow and regular movement of the hands which show
the time, so the result of all the complicated human activities of 160,000
Russians and French—all their passions, desires, remorse, humiliations,
sufferings, outbursts of pride, fear, and enthusiasm—was only the loss of the
battle of Austerlitz, the so-called battle of the three Emperors—that is to say, a
slow movement of the hand on the dial of human history.
Prince Andrew was on duty that day and in constant attendance on the
commander-in-chief.
At six in the evening, Kutuzov went to the Emperor's headquarters and after
staying but a short time with the Tsar went to see the grand marshal of the
court, Count Tolstoy.
Bolkonski took the opportunity to go in to get some details of the coming
action from Dolgorukov. He felt that Kutuzov was upset and dissatisfied about
something and that at headquarters they were dissatisfied with him, and also
that at the Emperor's headquarters everyone adopted toward him the tone of
men who know something others do not know: he therefore wished to speak to
Dolgorukov.
"Well, how d'you do, my dear fellow?" said Dolgorukov, who was sitting at
tea with Bilibin. "The fete is for tomorrow. How is your old fellow? Out of
sorts?"
"I won't say he is out of sorts, but I fancy he would like to be heard."
"But they heard him at the council of war and will hear him when he talks
sense, but to temporize and wait for something now when Bonaparte fears
nothing so much as a general battle is impossible."
"Yes, you have seen him?" said Prince Andrew. "Well, what is Bonaparte like?
How did he impress you?"
"Yes, I saw him, and am convinced that he fears nothing so much as a general
engagement," repeated Dolgorukov, evidently prizing this general conclusion
which he had arrived at from his interview with Napoleon. "If he weren't
afraid of a battle why did he ask for that interview? Why negotiate, and above
all why retreat, when to retreat is so contrary to his method of conducting war?
Believe me, he is afraid, afraid of a general battle. His hour has come! Mark
my words!"
"But tell me, what is he like, eh?" said Prince Andrew again.
"He is a man in a gray overcoat, very anxious that I should call him 'Your
Majesty,' but who, to his chagrin, got no title from me! That's the sort of man
he is, and nothing more," replied Dolgorukov, looking round at Bilibin with a
smile.
"Despite my great respect for old Kutuzov," he continued, "we should be a
nice set of fellows if we were to wait about and so give him a chance to
escape, or to trick us, now that we certainly have him in our hands! No, we
mustn't forget Suvorov and his rule—not to put yourself in a position to be
attacked, but yourself to attack. Believe me in war the energy of young men
often shows the way better than all the experience of old Cunctators."
"But in what position are we going to attack him? I have been at the outposts
today and it is impossible to say where his chief forces are situated," said
Prince Andrew.
He wished to explain to Dolgorukov a plan of attack he had himself formed.
"Oh, that is all the same," Dolgorukov said quickly, and getting up he spread a
map on the table. "All eventualities have been foreseen. If he is standing
before Brunn..."
And Prince Dolgorukov rapidly but indistinctly explained Weyrother's plan of
a flanking movement.
Prince Andrew began to reply and to state his own plan, which might have
been as good as Weyrother's, but for the disadvantage that Weyrother's had
already been approved. As soon as Prince Andrew began to demonstrate the
defects of the latter and the merits of his own plan, Prince Dolgorukov ceased
to listen to him and gazed absent-mindedly not at the map, but at Prince
Andrew's face.
"There will be a council of war at Kutuzov's tonight, though; you can say all
this there," remarked Dolgorukov.
"I will do so," said Prince Andrew, moving away from the map.
"Whatever are you bothering about, gentlemen?" said Bilibin, who, till then,
had listened with an amused smile to their conversation and now was
evidently ready with a joke. "Whether tomorrow brings victory or defeat, the
glory of our Russian arms is secure. Except your Kutuzov, there is not a single
Russian in command of a column! The commanders are: Herr General
Wimpfen, le Comte de Langeron, le Prince de Lichtenstein, le Prince, de
Hohenlohe, and finally Prishprish, and so on like all those Polish names."
"Be quiet, backbiter!" said Dolgorukov. "It is not true; there are now two
Russians, Miloradovich, and Dokhturov, and there would be a third, Count
Arakcheev, if his nerves were not too weak."
"However, I think General Kutuzov has come out," said Prince Andrew. "I
wish you good luck and success, gentlemen!" he added and went out after
shaking hands with Dolgorukov and Bilibin.
On the way home, Prince Andrew could not refrain from asking Kutuzov, who
was sitting silently beside him, what he thought of tomorrow's battle.
Kutuzov looked sternly at his adjutant and, after a pause, replied: "I think the
battle will be lost, and so I told Count Tolstoy and asked him to tell the
Emperor. What do you think he replied? 'But, my dear general, I am engaged
with rice and cutlets, look after military matters yourself!' Yes... That was the
answer I got!"
CHAPTER XII
Shortly after nine o'clock that evening, Weyrother drove with his plans to
Kutuzov's quarters where the council of war was to be held. All the
commanders of columns were summoned to the commander-in-chief's and
with the exception of Prince Bagration, who declined to come, were all there
at the appointed time.
Weyrother, who was in full control of the proposed battle, by his eagerness
and briskness presented a marked contrast to the dissatisfied and drowsy
Kutuzov, who reluctantly played the part of chairman and president of the
council of war. Weyrother evidently felt himself to be at the head of a
movement that had already become unrestrainable. He was like a horse
running downhill harnessed to a heavy cart. Whether he was pulling it or being
pushed by it he did not know, but rushed along at headlong speed with no time
to consider what this movement might lead to. Weyrother had been twice that
evening to the enemy's picket line to reconnoiter personally, and twice to the
Emperors, Russian and Austrian, to report and explain, and to his headquarters
where he had dictated the dispositions in German, and now, much exhausted,
he arrived at Kutuzov's.
He was evidently so busy that he even forgot to be polite to the commander in
chief. He interrupted him, talked rapidly and indistinctly, without looking at
the man he was addressing, and did not reply to questions put to him. He was
bespattered with mud and had a pitiful, weary, and distracted air, though at the
same time he was haughty and self-confident.
Kutuzov was occupying a nobleman's castle of modest dimensions near
Ostralitz. In the large drawing room which had become the commander in
chief's office were gathered Kutuzov himself, Weyrother, and the members of
the council of war. They were drinking tea, and only awaited Prince Bagration
to begin the council. At last Bagration's orderly came with the news that the
prince could not attend. Prince Andrew came in to inform the commander-inchief of this and, availing himself of permission previously given him by
Kutuzov to be present at the council, he remained in the room.
"Since Prince Bagration is not coming, we may begin," said Weyrother,
hurriedly rising from his seat and going up to the table on which an enormous
map of the environs of Brunn was spread out.
Kutuzov, with his uniform unbuttoned so that his fat neck bulged over his
collar as if escaping, was sitting almost asleep in a low chair, with his podgy
old hands resting symmetrically on its arms. At the sound of Weyrother's
voice, he opened his one eye with an effort.
"Yes, yes, if you please! It is already late," said he, and nodding his head he let
it droop and again closed his eye.
If at first the members of the council thought that Kutuzov was pretending to
sleep, the sounds his nose emitted during the reading that followed proved that
the commander-in-chief at that moment was absorbed by a far more serious
matter than a desire to show his contempt for the dispositions or anything else
—he was engaged in satisfying the irresistible human need for sleep. He really
was asleep. Weyrother, with the gesture of a man too busy to lose a moment,
glanced at Kutuzov and, having convinced himself that he was asleep, took up
a paper and in a loud, monotonous voice began to read out the dispositions for
the impending battle, under a heading which he also read out:
"Dispositions for an attack on the enemy position behind Kobelnitz and
Sokolnitz, November 30, 1805."
The dispositions were very complicated and difficult. They began as follows:
"As the enemy's left wing rests on wooded hills and his right extends along
Kobelnitz and Sokolnitz behind the ponds that are there, while we, on the
other hand, with our left wing by far outflank his right, it is advantageous to
attack the enemy's latter wing especially if we occupy the villages of Sokolnitz
and Kobelnitz, whereby we can both fall on his flank and pursue him over the
plain between Schlappanitz and the Thuerassa forest, avoiding the defiles of
Schlappanitz and Bellowitz which cover the enemy's front. For this object it is
necessary that... The first column marches... The second column marches...
The third column marches..." and so on, read Weyrother.
The generals seemed to listen reluctantly to the difficult dispositions. The tall,
fair-haired General Buxhowden stood, leaning his back against the wall, his
eyes fixed on a burning candle, and seemed not to listen or even to wish to be
thought to listen. Exactly opposite Weyrother, with his glistening wide-open
eyes fixed upon him and his mustache twisted upwards, sat the ruddy
Miloradovich in a military pose, his elbows turned outwards, his hands on his
knees, and his shoulders raised. He remained stubbornly silent, gazing at
Weyrother's face, and only turned away his eyes when the Austrian chief of
staff finished reading. Then Miloradovich looked round significantly at the
other generals. But one could not tell from that significant look whether he
agreed or disagreed and was satisfied or not with the arrangements. Next to
Weyrother sat Count Langeron who, with a subtle smile that never left his
typically southern French face during the whole time of the reading, gazed at
his delicate fingers which rapidly twirled by its corners a gold snuffbox on
which was a portrait. In the middle of one of the longest sentences, he stopped
the rotary motion of the snuffbox, raised his head, and with inimical politeness
lurking in the corners of his thin lips interrupted Weyrother, wishing to say
something. But the Austrian general, continuing to read, frowned angrily and
jerked his elbows, as if to say: "You can tell me your views later, but now be
so good as to look at the map and listen." Langeron lifted his eyes with an
expression of perplexity, turned round to Miloradovich as if seeking an
explanation, but meeting the latter's impressive but meaningless gaze drooped
his eyes sadly and again took to twirling his snuffbox.
"A geography lesson!" he muttered as if to himself, but loud enough to be
heard.
Przebyszewski, with respectful but dignified politeness, held his hand to his
ear toward Weyrother, with the air of a man absorbed in attention. Dohkturov,
a little man, sat opposite Weyrother, with an assiduous and modest mien, and
stooping over the outspread map conscientiously studied the dispositions and
the unfamiliar locality. He asked Weyrother several times to repeat words he
had not clearly heard and the difficult names of villages. Weyrother complied
and Dohkturov noted them down.
When the reading which lasted more than an hour was over, Langeron again
brought his snuffbox to rest and, without looking at Weyrother or at anyone in
particular, began to say how difficult it was to carry out such a plan in which
the enemy's position was assumed to be known, whereas it was perhaps not
known, since the enemy was in movement. Langeron's objections were valid
but it was obvious that their chief aim was to show General Weyrother—who
had read his dispositions with as much self-confidence as if he were
addressing school children—that he had to do, not with fools, but with men
who could teach him something in military matters.
When the monotonous sound of Weyrother's voice ceased, Kutuzov opened
his eye as a miller wakes up when the soporific drone of the mill wheel is
interrupted. He listened to what Langeron said, as if remarking, "So you are
still at that silly business!" quickly closed his eye again, and let his head sink
still lower.
Langeron, trying as virulently as possible to sting Weyrother's vanity as author
of the military plan, argued that Bonaparte might easily attack instead of being
attacked, and so render the whole of this plan perfectly worthless. Weyrother
met all objections with a firm and contemptuous smile, evidently prepared
beforehand to meet all objections be they what they might.
"If he could attack us, he would have done so today," said he.
"So you think he is powerless?" said Langeron.
"He has forty thousand men at most," replied Weyrother, with the smile of a
doctor to whom an old wife wishes to explain the treatment of a case.
"In that case he is inviting his doom by awaiting our attack," said Langeron,
with a subtly ironical smile, again glancing round for support to Miloradovich
who was near him.
But Miloradovich was at that moment evidently thinking of anything rather
than of what the generals were disputing about.
"Ma foi!" said he, "tomorrow we shall see all that on the battlefield."
Weyrother again gave that smile which seemed to say that to him it was
strange and ridiculous to meet objections from Russian generals and to have to
prove to them what he had not merely convinced himself of, but had also
convinced the sovereign Emperors of.
"The enemy has quenched his fires and a continual noise is heard from his
camp," said he. "What does that mean? Either he is retreating, which is the
only thing we need fear, or he is changing his position." (He smiled ironically.)
"But even if he also took up a position in the Thuerassa, he merely saves us a
great deal of trouble and all our arrangements to the minutest detail remain the
same."
"How is that?..." began Prince Andrew, who had for long been waiting an
opportunity to express his doubts.
Kutuzov here woke up, coughed heavily, and looked round at the generals.
"Gentlemen, the dispositions for tomorrow—or rather for today, for it is past
midnight—cannot now be altered," said he. "You have heard them, and we
shall all do our duty. But before a battle, there is nothing more important..." he
paused, "than to have a good sleep."
He moved as if to rise. The generals bowed and retired. It was past midnight.
Prince Andrew went out.
The council of war, at which Prince Andrew had not been able to express his
opinion as he had hoped to, left on him a vague and uneasy impression.
Whether Dolgorukov and Weyrother, or Kutuzov, Langeron, and the others
who did not approve of the plan of attack, were right—he did not know. "But
was it really not possible for Kutuzov to state his views plainly to the
Emperor? Is it possible that on account of court and personal considerations
tens of thousands of lives, and my life, my life," he thought, "must be risked?"
"Yes, it is very likely that I shall be killed tomorrow," he thought. And
suddenly, at this thought of death, a whole series of most distant, most
intimate, memories rose in his imagination: he remembered his last parting
from his father and his wife; he remembered the days when he first loved her.
He thought of her pregnancy and felt sorry for her and for himself, and in a
nervously emotional and softened mood he went out of the hut in which he
was billeted with Nesvitski and began to walk up and down before it.
The night was foggy and through the fog the moonlight gleamed mysteriously.
"Yes, tomorrow, tomorrow!" he thought. "Tomorrow everything may be over
for me! All these memories will be no more, none of them will have any
meaning for me. Tomorrow perhaps, even certainly, I have a presentiment that
for the first time I shall have to show all I can do." And his fancy pictured the
battle, its loss, the concentration of fighting at one point, and the hesitation of
all the commanders. And then that happy moment, that Toulon for which he
had so long waited, presents itself to him at last. He firmly and clearly
expresses his opinion to Kutuzov, to Weyrother, and to the Emperors. All are
struck by the justness of his views, but no one undertakes to carry them out, so
he takes a regiment, a division-stipulates that no one is to interfere with his
arrangements—leads his division to the decisive point, and gains the victory
alone. "But death and suffering?" suggested another voice. Prince Andrew,
however, did not answer that voice and went on dreaming of his triumphs. The
dispositions for the next battle are planned by him alone. Nominally he is only
an adjutant on Kutuzov's staff, but he does everything alone. The next battle is
won by him alone. Kutuzov is removed and he is appointed... "Well and then?"
asked the other voice. "If before that you are not ten times wounded, killed, or
betrayed, well... what then?..." "Well then," Prince Andrew answered himself,
"I don't know what will happen and don't want to know, and can't, but if I want
this—want glory, want to be known to men, want to be loved by them, it is not
my fault that I want it and want nothing but that and live only for that. Yes, for
that alone! I shall never tell anyone, but, oh God! what am I to do if I love
nothing but fame and men's esteem? Death, wounds, the loss of family—I fear
nothing. And precious and dear as many persons are to me—father, sister, wife
—those dearest to me—yet dreadful and unnatural as it seems, I would give
them all at once for a moment of glory, of triumph over men, of love from men
I don't know and never shall know, for the love of these men here," he thought,
as he listened to voices in Kutuzov's courtyard. The voices were those of the
orderlies who were packing up; one voice, probably a coachman's, was teasing
Kutuzov's old cook whom Prince Andrew knew, and who was called Tit. He
was saying, "Tit, I say, Tit!"
"Well?" returned the old man.
"Go, Tit, thresh a bit!" said the wag.
"Oh, go to the devil!" called out a voice, drowned by the laughter of the
orderlies and servants.
"All the same, I love and value nothing but triumph over them all, I value this
mystic power and glory that is floating here above me in this mist!"
CHAPTER XIII
That same night, Rostov was with a platoon on skirmishing duty in front of
Bagration's detachment. His hussars were placed along the line in couples and
he himself rode along the line trying to master the sleepiness that kept coming
over him. An enormous space, with our army's campfires dimly glowing in the
fog, could be seen behind him; in front of him was misty darkness. Rostov
could see nothing, peer as he would into that foggy distance: now something
gleamed gray, now there was something black, now little lights seemed to
glimmer where the enemy ought to be, now he fancied it was only something
in his own eyes. His eyes kept closing, and in his fancy appeared—now the
Emperor, now Denisov, and now Moscow memories—and he again hurriedly
opened his eyes and saw close before him the head and ears of the horse he
was riding, and sometimes, when he came within six paces of them, the black
figures of hussars, but in the distance was still the same misty darkness. "Why
not?... It might easily happen," thought Rostov, "that the Emperor will meet
me and give me an order as he would to any other officer; he'll say: 'Go and
find out what's there.' There are many stories of his getting to know an officer
in just such a chance way and attaching him to himself! What if he gave me a
place near him? Oh, how I would guard him, how I would tell him the truth,
how I would unmask his deceivers!" And in order to realize vividly his love
devotion to the sovereign, Rostov pictured to himself an enemy or a deceitful
German, whom he would not only kill with pleasure but whom he would slap
in the face before the Emperor. Suddenly a distant shout aroused him. He
started and opened his eyes.
"Where am I? Oh yes, in the skirmishing line... pass and watchword—shaft,
Olmutz. What a nuisance that our squadron will be in reserve tomorrow," he
thought. "I'll ask leave to go to the front, this may be my only chance of seeing
the Emperor. It won't be long now before I am off duty. I'll take another turn
and when I get back I'll go to the general and ask him." He readjusted himself
in the saddle and touched up his horse to ride once more round his hussars. It
seemed to him that it was getting lighter. To the left he saw a sloping descent
lit up, and facing it a black knoll that seemed as steep as a wall. On this knoll
there was a white patch that Rostov could not at all make out: was it a glade in
the wood lit up by the moon, or some unmelted snow, or some white houses?
He even thought something moved on that white spot. "I expect it's snow...
that spot... a spot—une tache," he thought. "There now... it's not a tache...
Natasha... sister, black eyes... Na... tasha... (Won't she be surprised when I tell
her how I've seen the Emperor?) Natasha... take my sabretache..."—"Keep to
the right, your honor, there are bushes here," came the voice of an hussar, past
whom Rostov was riding in the act of falling asleep. Rostov lifted his head
that had sunk almost to his horse's mane and pulled up beside the hussar. He
was succumbing to irresistible, youthful, childish drowsiness. "But what was I
thinking? I mustn't forget. How shall I speak to the Emperor? No, that's not it
—that's tomorrow. Oh yes! Natasha... sabretache... saber them... Whom? The
hussars... Ah, the hussars with mustaches. Along the Tverskaya Street rode the
hussar with mustaches... I thought about him too, just opposite Guryev's
house... Old Guryev.... Oh, but Denisov's a fine fellow. But that's all nonsense.
The chief thing is that the Emperor is here. How he looked at me and wished
to say something, but dared not.... No, it was I who dared not. But that's
nonsense, the chief thing is not to forget the important thing I was thinking of.
Yes, Na-tasha, sabretache, oh, yes, yes! That's right!" And his head once more
sank to his horse's neck. All at once it seemed to him that he was being fired
at. "What? What? What?... Cut them down! What?..." said Rostov, waking up.
At the moment he opened his eyes he heard in front of him, where the enemy
was, the long-drawn shouts of thousands of voices. His horse and the horse of
the hussar near him pricked their ears at these shouts. Over there, where the
shouting came from, a fire flared up and went out again, then another, and all
along the French line on the hill fires flared up and the shouting grew louder
and louder. Rostov could hear the sound of French words but could not
distinguish them. The din of many voices was too great; all he could hear was:
"ahahah!" and "rrrr!"
"What's that? What do you make of it?" said Rostov to the hussar beside him.
"That must be the enemy's camp!"
The hussar did not reply.
"Why, don't you hear it?" Rostov asked again, after waiting for a reply.
"Who can tell, your honor?" replied the hussar reluctantly.
"From the direction, it must be the enemy," repeated Rostov.
"It may be he or it may be nothing," muttered the hussar. "It's dark... Steady!"
he cried to his fidgeting horse.
Rostov's horse was also getting restive: it pawed the frozen ground, pricking
its ears at the noise and looking at the lights. The shouting grew still louder
and merged into a general roar that only an army of several thousand men
could produce. The lights spread farther and farther, probably along the line of
the French camp. Rostov no longer wanted to sleep. The gay triumphant
shouting of the enemy army had a stimulating effect on him. "Vive
l'Empereur! L'Empereur!" he now heard distinctly.
"They can't be far off, probably just beyond the stream," he said to the hussar
beside him.
The hussar only sighed without replying and coughed angrily. The sound of
horse's hoofs approaching at a trot along the line of hussars was heard, and out
of the foggy darkness the figure of a sergeant of hussars suddenly appeared,
looming huge as an elephant.
"Your honor, the generals!" said the sergeant, riding up to Rostov.
Rostov, still looking round toward the fires and the shouts, rode with the
sergeant to meet some mounted men who were riding along the line. One was
on a white horse. Prince Bagration and Prince Dolgorukov with their adjutants
had come to witness the curious phenomenon of the lights and shouts in the
enemy's camp. Rostov rode up to Bagration, reported to him, and then joined
the adjutants listening to what the generals were saying.
"Believe me," said Prince Dolgorukov, addressing Bagration, "it is nothing but
a trick! He has retreated and ordered the rearguard to kindle fires and make a
noise to deceive us."
"Hardly," said Bagration. "I saw them this evening on that knoll; if they had
retreated they would have withdrawn from that too.... Officer!" said Bagration
to Rostov, "are the enemy's skirmishers still there?"
"They were there this evening, but now I don't know, your excellency. Shall I
go with some of my hussars to see?" replied Rostov.
Bagration stopped and, before replying, tried to see Rostov's face in the mist.
"Well, go and see," he said, after a pause.
"Yes, sir."
Rostov spurred his horse, called to Sergeant Fedchenko and two other hussars,
told them to follow him, and trotted downhill in the direction from which the
shouting came. He felt both frightened and pleased to be riding alone with
three hussars into that mysterious and dangerous misty distance where no one
had been before him. Bagration called to him from the hill not to go beyond
the stream, but Rostov pretended not to hear him and did not stop but rode on
and on, continually mistaking bushes for trees and gullies for men and
continually discovering his mistakes. Having descended the hill at a trot, he no
longer saw either our own or the enemy's fires, but heard the shouting of the
French more loudly and distinctly. In the valley he saw before him something
like a river, but when he reached it he found it was a road. Having come out
onto the road he reined in his horse, hesitating whether to ride along it or cross
it and ride over the black field up the hillside. To keep to the road which
gleamed white in the mist would have been safer because it would be easier to
see people coming along it. "Follow me!" said he, crossed the road, and began
riding up the hill at a gallop toward the point where the French pickets had
been standing that evening.
"Your honor, there he is!" cried one of the hussars behind him. And before
Rostov had time to make out what the black thing was that had suddenly
appeared in the fog, there was a flash, followed by a report, and a bullet
whizzing high up in the mist with a plaintive sound passed out of hearing.
Another musket missed fire but flashed in the pan. Rostov turned his horse and
galloped back. Four more reports followed at intervals, and the bullets passed
somewhere in the fog singing in different tones. Rostov reined in his horse,
whose spirits had risen, like his own, at the firing, and went back at a footpace.
"Well, some more! Some more!" a merry voice was saying in his soul. But no
more shots came.
Only when approaching Bagration did Rostov let his horse gallop again, and
with his hand at the salute rode up to the general.
Dolgorukov was still insisting that the French had retreated and had only lit
fires to deceive us.
"What does that prove?" he was saying as Rostov rode up. "They might retreat
and leave the pickets."
"It's plain that they have not all gone yet, Prince," said Bagration. "Wait till
tomorrow morning, we'll find out everything tomorrow."
"The picket is still on the hill, your excellency, just where it was in the
evening," reported Rostov, stooping forward with his hand at the salute and
unable to repress the smile of delight induced by his ride and especially by the
sound of the bullets.
"Very good, very good," said Bagration. "Thank you, officer."
"Your excellency," said Rostov, "may I ask a favor?"
"What is it?"
"Tomorrow our squadron is to be in reserve. May I ask to be attached to the
first squadron?"
"What's your name?"
"Count Rostov."
"Oh, very well, you may stay in attendance on me."
"Count Ilya Rostov's son?" asked Dolgorukov.
But Rostov did not reply.
"Then I may reckon on it, your excellency?"
"I will give the order."
"Tomorrow very likely I may be sent with some message to the Emperor,"
thought Rostov.
"Thank God!"
The fires and shouting in the enemy's army were occasioned by the fact that
while Napoleon's proclamation was being read to the troops the Emperor
himself rode round his bivouacs. The soldiers, on seeing him, lit wisps of
straw and ran after him, shouting, "Vive l'Empereur!" Napoleon's
proclamation was as follows:
Soldiers! The Russian army is advancing against you to avenge the Austrian
army of Ulm. They are the same battalions you broke at Hollabrunn and have
pursued ever since to this place. The position we occupy is a strong one, and
while they are marching to go round me on the right they will expose a flank
to me. Soldiers! I will myself direct your battalions. I will keep out of fire if
you with your habitual valor carry disorder and confusion into the enemy's
ranks, but should victory be in doubt, even for a moment, you will see your
Emperor exposing himself to the first blows of the enemy, for there must be no
doubt of victory, especially on this day when what is at stake is the honor of
the French infantry, so necessary to the honor of our nation.
Do not break your ranks on the plea of removing the wounded! Let every man
be fully imbued with the thought that we must defeat these hirelings of
England, inspired by such hatred of our nation! This victory will conclude our
campaign and we can return to winter quarters, where fresh French troops who
are being raised in France will join us, and the peace I shall conclude will be
worthy of my people, of you, and of myself.
NAPOLEON
CHAPTER XIV
At five in the morning it was still quite dark. The troops of the center, the
reserves, and Bagration's right flank had not yet moved, but on the left flank
the columns of infantry, cavalry, and artillery, which were to be the first to
descend the heights to attack the French right flank and drive it into the
Bohemian mountains according to plan, were already up and astir. The smoke
of the campfires, into which they were throwing everything superfluous, made
the eyes smart. It was cold and dark. The officers were hurriedly drinking tea
and breakfasting, the soldiers, munching biscuit and beating a tattoo with their
feet to warm themselves, gathering round the fires throwing into the flames
the remains of sheds, chairs, tables, wheels, tubs, and everything that they did
not want or could not carry away with them. Austrian column guides were
moving in and out among the Russian troops and served as heralds of the
advance. As soon as an Austrian officer showed himself near a commanding
officer's quarters, the regiment began to move: the soldiers ran from the fires,
thrust their pipes into their boots, their bags into the carts, got their muskets
ready, and formed rank. The officers buttoned up their coats, buckled on their
swords and pouches, and moved along the ranks shouting. The train drivers
and orderlies harnessed and packed the wagons and tied on the loads. The
adjutants and battalion and regimental commanders mounted, crossed
themselves, gave final instructions, orders, and commissions to the baggage
men who remained behind, and the monotonous tramp of thousands of feet
resounded. The column moved forward without knowing where and unable,
from the masses around them, the smoke and the increasing fog, to see either
the place they were leaving or that to which they were going.
A soldier on the march is hemmed in and borne along by his regiment as much
as a sailor is by his ship. However far he has walked, whatever strange,
unknown, and dangerous places he reaches, just as a sailor is always
surrounded by the same decks, masts, and rigging of his ship, so the soldier
always has around him the same comrades, the same ranks, the same sergeant
major Ivan Mitrich, the same company dog Jack, and the same commanders.
The sailor rarely cares to know the latitude in which his ship is sailing, but on
the day of battle—heaven knows how and whence—a stern note of which all
are conscious sounds in the moral atmosphere of an army, announcing the
approach of something decisive and solemn, and awakening in the men an
unusual curiosity. On the day of battle the soldiers excitedly try to get beyond
the interests of their regiment, they listen intently, look about, and eagerly ask
concerning what is going on around them.
The fog had grown so dense that though it was growing light they could not
see ten paces ahead. Bushes looked like gigantic trees and level ground like
cliffs and slopes. Anywhere, on any side, one might encounter an enemy
invisible ten paces off. But the columns advanced for a long time, always in
the same fog, descending and ascending hills, avoiding gardens and
enclosures, going over new and unknown ground, and nowhere encountering
the enemy. On the contrary, the soldiers became aware that in front, behind,
and on all sides, other Russian columns were moving in the same direction.
Every soldier felt glad to know that to the unknown place where he was going,
many more of our men were going too.
"There now, the Kurskies have also gone past," was being said in the ranks.
"It's wonderful what a lot of our troops have gathered, lads! Last night I
looked at the campfires and there was no end of them. A regular Moscow!"
Though none of the column commanders rode up to the ranks or talked to the
men (the commanders, as we saw at the council of war, were out of humor and
dissatisfied with the affair, and so did not exert themselves to cheer the men
but merely carried out the orders), yet the troops marched gaily, as they always
do when going into action, especially to an attack. But when they had marched
for about an hour in the dense fog, the greater part of the men had to halt and
an unpleasant consciousness of some dislocation and blunder spread through
the ranks. How such a consciousness is communicated is very difficult to
define, but it certainly is communicated very surely, and flows rapidly,
imperceptibly, and irrepressibly, as water does in a creek. Had the Russian
army been alone without any allies, it might perhaps have been a long time
before this consciousness of mismanagement became a general conviction, but
as it was, the disorder was readily and naturally attributed to the stupid
Germans, and everyone was convinced that a dangerous muddle had been
occasioned by the sausage eaters.
"Why have we stopped? Is the way blocked? Or have we already come up
against the French?"
"No, one can't hear them. They'd be firing if we had."
"They were in a hurry enough to start us, and now here we stand in the middle
of a field without rhyme or reason. It's all those damned Germans' muddling!
What stupid devils!"
"Yes, I'd send them on in front, but no fear, they're crowding up behind. And
now here we stand hungry."
"I say, shall we soon be clear? They say the cavalry are blocking the way,"
said an officer.
"Ah, those damned Germans! They don't know their own country!" said
another.
"What division are you?" shouted an adjutant, riding up.
"The Eighteenth."
"Then why are you here? You should have gone on long ago, now you won't
get there till evening."
"What stupid orders! They don't themselves know what they are doing!" said
the officer and rode off.
Then a general rode past shouting something angrily, not in Russian.
"Tafa-lafa! But what he's jabbering no one can make out," said a soldier,
mimicking the general who had ridden away. "I'd shoot them, the scoundrels!"
"We were ordered to be at the place before nine, but we haven't got halfway.
Fine orders!" was being repeated on different sides.
And the feeling of energy with which the troops had started began to turn into
vexation and anger at the stupid arrangements and at the Germans.
The cause of the confusion was that while the Austrian cavalry was moving
toward our left flank, the higher command found that our center was too far
separated from our right flank and the cavalry were all ordered to turn back to
the right. Several thousand cavalry crossed in front of the infantry, who had to
wait.
At the front an altercation occurred between an Austrian guide and a Russian
general. The general shouted a demand that the cavalry should be halted, the
Austrian argued that not he, but the higher command, was to blame. The
troops meanwhile stood growing listless and dispirited. After an hour's delay
they at last moved on, descending the hill. The fog that was dispersing on the
hill lay still more densely below, where they were descending. In front in the
fog a shot was heard and then another, at first irregularly at varying intervals
—trata... tat—and then more and more regularly and rapidly, and the action at
the Goldbach Stream began.
Not expecting to come on the enemy down by the stream, and having
stumbled on him in the fog, hearing no encouraging word from their
commanders, and with a consciousness of being too late spreading through the
ranks, and above all being unable to see anything in front or around them in
the thick fog, the Russians exchanged shots with the enemy lazily and
advanced and again halted, receiving no timely orders from the officers or
adjutants who wandered about in the fog in those unknown surroundings
unable to find their own regiments. In this way the action began for the first,
second, and third columns, which had gone down into the valley. The fourth
column, with which Kutuzov was, stood on the Pratzen Heights.
Below, where the fight was beginning, there was still thick fog; on the higher
ground it was clearing, but nothing could be seen of what was going on in
front. Whether all the enemy forces were, as we supposed, six miles away, or
whether they were near by in that sea of mist, no one knew till after eight
o'clock.
It was nine o'clock in the morning. The fog lay unbroken like a sea down
below, but higher up at the village of Schlappanitz where Napoleon stood with
his marshals around him, it was quite light. Above him was a clear blue sky,
and the sun's vast orb quivered like a huge hollow, crimson float on the surface
of that milky sea of mist. The whole French army, and even Napoleon himself
with his staff, were not on the far side of the streams and hollows of Sokolnitz
and Schlappanitz beyond which we intended to take up our position and begin
the action, but were on this side, so close to our own forces that Napoleon with
the naked eye could distinguish a mounted man from one on foot. Napoleon,
in the blue cloak which he had worn on his Italian campaign, sat on his small
gray Arab horse a little in front of his marshals. He gazed silently at the hills
which seemed to rise out of the sea of mist and on which the Russian troops
were moving in the distance, and he listened to the sounds of firing in the
valley. Not a single muscle of his face—which in those days was still thin—
moved. His gleaming eyes were fixed intently on one spot. His predictions
were being justified. Part of the Russian force had already descended into the
valley toward the ponds and lakes and part were leaving these Pratzen Heights
which he intended to attack and regarded as the key to the position. He saw
over the mist that in a hollow between two hills near the village of Pratzen, the
Russian columns, their bayonets glittering, were moving continuously in one
direction toward the valley and disappearing one after another into the mist.
From information he had received the evening before, from the sound of
wheels and footsteps heard by the outposts during the night, by the disorderly
movement of the Russian columns, and from all indications, he saw clearly
that the allies believed him to be far away in front of them, and that the
columns moving near Pratzen constituted the center of the Russian army, and
that that center was already sufficiently weakened to be successfully attacked.
But still he did not begin the engagement.
Today was a great day for him—the anniversary of his coronation. Before
dawn he had slept for a few hours, and refreshed, vigorous, and in good spirits,
he mounted his horse and rode out into the field in that happy mood in which
everything seems possible and everything succeeds. He sat motionless,
looking at the heights visible above the mist, and his cold face wore that
special look of confident, self-complacent happiness that one sees on the face
of a boy happily in love. The marshals stood behind him not venturing to
distract his attention. He looked now at the Pratzen Heights, now at the sun
floating up out of the mist.
When the sun had entirely emerged from the fog, and fields and mist were
aglow with dazzling light—as if he had only awaited this to begin the action—
he drew the glove from his shapely white hand, made a sign with it to the
marshals, and ordered the action to begin. The marshals, accompanied by
adjutants, galloped off in different directions, and a few minutes later the chief
forces of the French army moved rapidly toward those Pratzen Heights which
were being more and more denuded by Russian troops moving down the
valley to their left.
CHAPTER XV
At eight o'clock Kutuzov rode to Pratzen at the head of the fourth column,
Miloradovich's, the one that was to take the place of Przebyszewski's and
Langeron's columns which had already gone down into the valley. He greeted
the men of the foremost regiment and gave them the order to march, thereby
indicating that he intended to lead that column himself. When he had reached
the village of Pratzen he halted. Prince Andrew was behind, among the
immense number forming the commander-in-chief's suite. He was in a state of
suppressed excitement and irritation, though controlledly calm as a man is at
the approach of a long-awaited moment. He was firmly convinced that this
was the day of his Toulon, or his bridge of Arcola. How it would come about
he did not know, but he felt sure it would do so. The locality and the position
of our troops were known to him as far as they could be known to anyone in
our army. His own strategic plan, which obviously could not now be carried
out, was forgotten. Now, entering into Weyrother's plan, Prince Andrew
considered possible contingencies and formed new projects such as might call
for his rapidity of perception and decision.
To the left down below in the mist, the musketry fire of unseen forces could be
heard. It was there Prince Andrew thought the fight would concentrate. "There
we shall encounter difficulties, and there," thought he, "I shall be sent with a
brigade or division, and there, standard in hand, I shall go forward and break
whatever is in front of me."
He could not look calmly at the standards of the passing battalions. Seeing
them he kept thinking, "That may be the very standard with which I shall lead
the army."
In the morning all that was left of the night mist on the heights was a hoar
frost now turning to dew, but in the valleys it still lay like a milk-white sea.
Nothing was visible in the valley to the left into which our troops had
descended and from whence came the sounds of firing. Above the heights was
the dark clear sky, and to the right the vast orb of the sun. In front, far off on
the farther shore of that sea of mist, some wooded hills were discernible, and it
was there the enemy probably was, for something could be descried. On the
right the Guards were entering the misty region with a sound of hoofs and
wheels and now and then a gleam of bayonets; to the left beyond the village
similar masses of cavalry came up and disappeared in the sea of mist. In front
and behind moved infantry. The commander-in-chief was standing at the end
of the village letting the troops pass by him. That morning Kutuzov seemed
worn and irritable. The infantry passing before him came to a halt without any
command being given, apparently obstructed by something in front.
"Do order them to form into battalion columns and go round the village!" he
said angrily to a general who had ridden up. "Don't you understand, your
excellency, my dear sir, that you must not defile through narrow village streets
when we are marching against the enemy?"
"I intended to re-form them beyond the village, your excellency," answered the
general.
Kutuzov laughed bitterly.
"You'll make a fine thing of it, deploying in sight of the enemy! Very fine!"
"The enemy is still far away, your excellency. According to the dispositions..."
"The dispositions!" exclaimed Kutuzov bitterly. "Who told you that?... Kindly
do as you are ordered."
"Yes, sir."
"My dear fellow," Nesvitski whispered to Prince Andrew, "the old man is as
surly as a dog."
An Austrian officer in a white uniform with green plumes in his hat galloped
up to Kutuzov and asked in the Emperor's name had the fourth column
advanced into action.
Kutuzov turned round without answering and his eye happened to fall upon
Prince Andrew, who was beside him. Seeing him, Kutuzov's malevolent and
caustic expression softened, as if admitting that what was being done was not
his adjutant's fault, and still not answering the Austrian adjutant, he addressed
Bolkonski.
"Go, my dear fellow, and see whether the third division has passed the village.
Tell it to stop and await my orders."
Hardly had Prince Andrew started than he stopped him.
"And ask whether sharpshooters have been posted," he added. "What are they
doing? What are they doing?" he murmured to himself, still not replying to the
Austrian.
Prince Andrew galloped off to execute the order.
Overtaking the battalions that continued to advance, he stopped the third
division and convinced himself that there really were no sharpshooters in front
of our columns. The colonel at the head of the regiment was much surprised at
the commander-in-chief's order to throw out skirmishers. He had felt perfectly
sure that there were other troops in front of him and that the enemy must be at
least six miles away. There was really nothing to be seen in front except a
barren descent hidden by dense mist. Having given orders in the commanderin-chief's name to rectify this omission, Prince Andrew galloped back.
Kutuzov still in the same place, his stout body resting heavily in the saddle
with the lassitude of age, sat yawning wearily with closed eyes. The troops
were no longer moving, but stood with the butts of their muskets on the
ground.
"All right, all right!" he said to Prince Andrew, and turned to a general who,
watch in hand, was saying it was time they started as all the left-flank columns
had already descended.
"Plenty of time, your excellency," muttered Kutuzov in the midst of a yawn.
"Plenty of time," he repeated.
Just then at a distance behind Kutuzov was heard the sound of regiments
saluting, and this sound rapidly came nearer along the whole extended line of
the advancing Russian columns. Evidently the person they were greeting was
riding quickly. When the soldiers of the regiment in front of which Kutuzov
was standing began to shout, he rode a little to one side and looked round with
a frown. Along the road from Pratzen galloped what looked like a squadron of
horsemen in various uniforms. Two of them rode side by side in front, at full
gallop. One in a black uniform with white plumes in his hat rode a bobtailed
chestnut horse, the other who was in a white uniform rode a black one. These
were the two Emperors followed by their suites. Kutuzov, affecting the
manners of an old soldier at the front, gave the command "Attention!" and
rode up to the Emperors with a salute. His whole appearance and manner were
suddenly transformed. He put on the air of a subordinate who obeys without
reasoning. With an affectation of respect which evidently struck Alexander
unpleasantly, he rode up and saluted.
This unpleasant impression merely flitted over the young and happy face of
the Emperor like a cloud of haze across a clear sky and vanished. After his
illness he looked rather thinner that day than on the field of Olmutz where
Bolkonski had seen him for the first time abroad, but there was still the same
bewitching combination of majesty and mildness in his fine gray eyes, and on
his delicate lips the same capacity for varying expression and the same
prevalent appearance of goodhearted innocent youth.
At the Olmutz review he had seemed more majestic; here he seemed brighter
and more energetic. He was slightly flushed after galloping two miles, and
reining in his horse he sighed restfully and looked round at the faces of his
suite, young and animated as his own. Czartoryski, Novosiltsev, Prince
Volkonsky, Strogonov, and the others, all richly dressed gay young men on
splendid, well-groomed, fresh, only slightly heated horses, exchanging
remarks and smiling, had stopped behind the Emperor. The Emperor Francis, a
rosy, long faced young man, sat very erect on his handsome black horse,
looking about him in a leisurely and preoccupied manner. He beckoned to one
of his white adjutants and asked some question—"Most likely he is asking at
what o'clock they started," thought Prince Andrew, watching his old
acquaintance with a smile he could not repress as he recalled his reception at
Brunn. In the Emperors' suite were the picked young orderly officers of the
Guard and line regiments, Russian and Austrian. Among them were grooms
leading the Tsar's beautiful relay horses covered with embroidered cloths.
As when a window is opened a whiff of fresh air from the fields enters a stuffy
room, so a whiff of youthfulness, energy, and confidence of success reached
Kutuzov's cheerless staff with the galloping advent of all these brilliant young
men.
"Why aren't you beginning, Michael Ilarionovich?" said the Emperor
Alexander hurriedly to Kutuzov, glancing courteously at the same time at the
Emperor Francis.
"I am waiting, Your Majesty," answered Kutuzov, bending forward
respectfully.
The Emperor, frowning slightly, bent his ear forward as if he had not quite
heard.
"Waiting, Your Majesty," repeated Kutuzov. (Prince Andrew noted that
Kutuzov's upper lip twitched unnaturally as he said the word "waiting.") "Not
all the columns have formed up yet, Your Majesty."
The Tsar heard but obviously did not like the reply; he shrugged his rather
round shoulders and glanced at Novosiltsev who was near him, as if
complaining of Kutuzov.
"You know, Michael Ilarionovich, we are not on the Empress' Field where a
parade does not begin till all the troops are assembled," said the Tsar with
another glance at the Emperor Francis, as if inviting him if not to join in at
least to listen to what he was saying. But the Emperor Francis continued to
look about him and did not listen.
"That is just why I do not begin, sire," said Kutuzov in a resounding voice,
apparently to preclude the possibility of not being heard, and again something
in his face twitched—"That is just why I do not begin, sire, because we are not
on parade and not on the Empress' Field," said clearly and distinctly.
In the Emperor's suite all exchanged rapid looks that expressed dissatisfaction
and reproach. "Old though he may be, he should not, he certainly should not,
speak like that," their glances seemed to say.
The Tsar looked intently and observantly into Kutuzov's eye waiting to hear
whether he would say anything more. But Kutuzov, with respectfully bowed
head, seemed also to be waiting. The silence lasted for about a minute.
"However, if you command it, Your Majesty," said Kutuzov, lifting his head
and again assuming his former tone of a dull, unreasoning, but submissive
general.
He touched his horse and having called Miloradovich, the commander of the
column, gave him the order to advance.
The troops again began to move, and two battalions of the Novgorod and one
of the Apsheron regiment went forward past the Emperor.
As this Apsheron battalion marched by, the red-faced Miloradovich, without
his greatcoat, with his Orders on his breast and an enormous tuft of plumes in
his cocked hat worn on one side with its corners front and back, galloped
strenuously forward, and with a dashing salute reined in his horse before the
Emperor.
"God be with you, general!" said the Emperor.
"Ma foi, sire, nous ferons ce qui sera dans notre possibilite, sire," * he
answered gaily, raising nevertheless ironic smiles among the gentlemen of the
Tsar's suite by his poor French.
* "Indeed, Sire, we shall do everything it is possible to
do, Sire."
Miloradovich wheeled his horse sharply and stationed himself a little behind
the Emperor. The Apsheron men, excited by the Tsar's presence, passed in step
before the Emperors and their suites at a bold, brisk pace.
"Lads!" shouted Miloradovich in a loud, self-confident, and cheery voice,
obviously so elated by the sound of firing, by the prospect of battle, and by the
sight of the gallant Apsherons, his comrades in Suvorov's time, now passing
so gallantly before the Emperors, that he forgot the sovereigns' presence.
"Lads, it's not the first village you've had to take," cried he.
"Glad to do our best!" shouted the soldiers.
The Emperor's horse started at the sudden cry. This horse that had carried the
sovereign at reviews in Russia bore him also here on the field of Austerlitz,
enduring the heedless blows of his left foot and pricking its ears at the sound
of shots just as it had done on the Empress' Field, not understanding the
significance of the firing, nor of the nearness of the Emperor Francis' black
cob, nor of all that was being said, thought, and felt that day by its rider.
The Emperor turned with a smile to one of his followers and made a remark to
him, pointing to the gallant Apsherons.
CHAPTER XVI
Kutuzov accompanied by his adjutants rode at a walking pace behind the
carabineers.
When he had gone less than half a mile in the rear of the column he stopped at
a solitary, deserted house that had probably once been an inn, where two roads
parted. Both of them led downhill and troops were marching along both.
The fog had begun to clear and enemy troops were already dimly visible about
a mile and a half off on the opposite heights. Down below, on the left, the
firing became more distinct. Kutuzov had stopped and was speaking to an
Austrian general. Prince Andrew, who was a little behind looking at them,
turned to an adjutant to ask him for a field glass.
"Look, look!" said this adjutant, looking not at the troops in the distance, but
down the hill before him. "It's the French!"
The two generals and the adjutant took hold of the field glass, trying to snatch
it from one another. The expression on all their faces suddenly changed to one
of horror. The French were supposed to be a mile and a half away, but had
suddenly and unexpectedly appeared just in front of us.
"It's the enemy?... No!... Yes, see it is!... for certain.... But how is that?" said
different voices.
With the naked eye Prince Andrew saw below them to the right, not more than
five hundred paces from where Kutuzov was standing, a dense French column
coming up to meet the Apsherons.
"Here it is! The decisive moment has arrived. My turn has come," thought
Prince Andrew, and striking his horse he rode up to Kutuzov.
"The Apsherons must be stopped, your excellency," cried he. But at that very
instant a cloud of smoke spread all round, firing was heard quite close at hand,
and a voice of naive terror barely two steps from Prince Andrew shouted,
"Brothers! All's lost!" And at this as if at a command, everyone began to run.
Confused and ever-increasing crowds were running back to where five
minutes before the troops had passed the Emperors. Not only would it have
been difficult to stop that crowd, it was even impossible not to be carried back
with it oneself. Bolkonski only tried not to lose touch with it, and looked
around bewildered and unable to grasp what was happening in front of him.
Nesvitski with an angry face, red and unlike himself, was shouting to Kutuzov
that if he did not ride away at once he would certainly be taken prisoner.
Kutuzov remained in the same place and without answering drew out a
handkerchief. Blood was flowing from his cheek. Prince Andrew forced his
way to him.
"You are wounded?" he asked, hardly able to master the trembling of his lower
jaw.
"The wound is not here, it is there!" said Kutuzov, pressing the handkerchief to
his wounded cheek and pointing to the fleeing soldiers. "Stop them!" he
shouted, and at the same moment, probably realizing that it was impossible to
stop them, spurred his horse and rode to the right.
A fresh wave of the flying mob caught him and bore him back with it.
The troops were running in such a dense mass that once surrounded by them it
was difficult to get out again. One was shouting, "Get on! Why are you
hindering us?" Another in the same place turned round and fired in the air; a
third was striking the horse Kutuzov himself rode. Having by a great effort got
away to the left from that flood of men, Kutuzov, with his suite diminished by
more than half, rode toward a sound of artillery fire near by. Having forced his
way out of the crowd of fugitives, Prince Andrew, trying to keep near
Kutuzov, saw on the slope of the hill amid the smoke a Russian battery that
was still firing and Frenchmen running toward it. Higher up stood some
Russian infantry, neither moving forward to protect the battery nor backward
with the fleeing crowd. A mounted general separated himself from the infantry
and approached Kutuzov. Of Kutuzov's suite only four remained. They were
all pale and exchanged looks in silence.
"Stop those wretches!" gasped Kutuzov to the regimental commander,
pointing to the flying soldiers; but at that instant, as if to punish him for those
words, bullets flew hissing across the regiment and across Kutuzov's suite like
a flock of little birds.
The French had attacked the battery and, seeing Kutuzov, were firing at him.
After this volley the regimental commander clutched at his leg; several
soldiers fell, and a second lieutenant who was holding the flag let it fall from
his hands. It swayed and fell, but caught on the muskets of the nearest soldiers.
The soldiers started firing without orders.
"Oh! Oh! Oh!" groaned Kutuzov despairingly and looked around....
"Bolkonski!" he whispered, his voice trembling from a consciousness of the
feebleness of age, "Bolkonski!" he whispered, pointing to the disordered
battalion and at the enemy, "what's that?"
But before he had finished speaking, Prince Andrew, feeling tears of shame
and anger choking him, had already leapt from his horse and run to the
standard.
"Forward, lads!" he shouted in a voice piercing as a child's.
"Here it is!" thought he, seizing the staff of the standard and hearing with
pleasure the whistle of bullets evidently aimed at him. Several soldiers fell.
"Hurrah!" shouted Prince Andrew, and, scarcely able to hold up the heavy
standard, he ran forward with full confidence that the whole battalion would
follow him.
And really he only ran a few steps alone. One soldier moved and then another
and soon the whole battalion ran forward shouting "Hurrah!" and overtook
him. A sergeant of the battalion ran up and took the flag that was swaying
from its weight in Prince Andrew's hands, but he was immediately killed.
Prince Andrew again seized the standard and, dragging it by the staff, ran on
with the battalion. In front he saw our artillerymen, some of whom were
fighting, while others, having abandoned their guns, were running toward him.
He also saw French infantry soldiers who were seizing the artillery horses and
turning the guns round. Prince Andrew and the battalion were already within
twenty paces of the cannon. He heard the whistle of bullets above him
unceasingly and to right and left of him soldiers continually groaned and
dropped. But he did not look at them: he looked only at what was going on in
front of him—at the battery. He now saw clearly the figure of a red-haired
gunner with his shako knocked awry, pulling one end of a mop while a French
soldier tugged at the other. He could distinctly see the distraught yet angry
expression on the faces of these two men, who evidently did not realize what
they were doing.
"What are they about?" thought Prince Andrew as he gazed at them. "Why
doesn't the red-haired gunner run away as he is unarmed? Why doesn't the
Frenchman stab him? He will not get away before the Frenchman remembers
his bayonet and stabs him...."
And really another French soldier, trailing his musket, ran up to the struggling
men, and the fate of the red-haired gunner, who had triumphantly secured the
mop and still did not realize what awaited him, was about to be decided. But
Prince Andrew did not see how it ended. It seemed to him as though one of the
soldiers near him hit him on the head with the full swing of a bludgeon. It hurt
a little, but the worst of it was that the pain distracted him and prevented his
seeing what he had been looking at.
"What's this? Am I falling? My legs are giving way," thought he, and fell on
his back. He opened his eyes, hoping to see how the struggle of the Frenchmen
with the gunners ended, whether the red-haired gunner had been killed or not
and whether the cannon had been captured or saved. But he saw nothing.
Above him there was now nothing but the sky—the lofty sky, not clear yet still
immeasurably lofty, with gray clouds gliding slowly across it. "How quiet,
peaceful, and solemn; not at all as I ran," thought Prince Andrew—"not as we
ran, shouting and fighting, not at all as the gunner and the Frenchman with
frightened and angry faces struggled for the mop: how differently do those
clouds glide across that lofty infinite sky! How was it I did not see that lofty
sky before? And how happy I am to have found it at last! Yes! All is vanity, all
falsehood, except that infinite sky. There is nothing, nothing, but that. But
even it does not exist, there is nothing but quiet and peace. Thank God!..."
CHAPTER XVII
On our right flank commanded by Bagration, at nine o'clock the battle had not
yet begun. Not wishing to agree to Dolgorukov's demand to commence the
action, and wishing to avert responsibility from himself, Prince Bagration
proposed to Dolgorukov to send to inquire of the commander-in-chief.
Bagration knew that as the distance between the two flanks was more than six
miles, even if the messenger were not killed (which he very likely would be),
and found the commander-in-chief (which would be very difficult), he would
not be able to get back before evening.
Bagration cast his large, expressionless, sleepy eyes round his suite, and the
boyish face Rostov, breathless with excitement and hope, was the first to catch
his eye. He sent him.
"And if I should meet His Majesty before I meet the commander-in-chief, your
excellency?" said Rostov, with his hand to his cap.
"You can give the message to His Majesty," said Dolgorukov, hurriedly
interrupting Bagration.
On being relieved from picket duty Rostov had managed to get a few hours'
sleep before morning and felt cheerful, bold, and resolute, with elasticity of
movement, faith in his good fortune, and generally in that state of mind which
makes everything seem possible, pleasant, and easy.
All his wishes were being fulfilled that morning: there was to be a general
engagement in which he was taking part, more than that, he was orderly to the
bravest general, and still more, he was going with a message to Kutuzov,
perhaps even to the sovereign himself. The morning was bright, he had a good
horse under him, and his heart was full of joy and happiness. On receiving the
order he gave his horse the rein and galloped along the line. At first he rode
along the line of Bagration's troops, which had not yet advanced into action
but were standing motionless; then he came to the region occupied by
Uvarov's cavalry and here he noticed a stir and signs of preparation for battle;
having passed Uvarov's cavalry he clearly heard the sound of cannon and
musketry ahead of him. The firing grew louder and louder.
In the fresh morning air were now heard, not two or three musket shots at
irregular intervals as before, followed by one or two cannon shots, but a roll of
volleys of musketry from the slopes of the hill before Pratzen, interrupted by
such frequent reports of cannon that sometimes several of them were not
separated from one another but merged into a general roar.
He could see puffs of musketry smoke that seemed to chase one another down
the hillsides, and clouds of cannon smoke rolling, spreading, and mingling
with one another. He could also, by the gleam of bayonets visible through the
smoke, make out moving masses of infantry and narrow lines of artillery with
green caissons.
Rostov stopped his horse for a moment on a hillock to see what was going on,
but strain his attention as he would he could not understand or make out
anything of what was happening: there in the smoke men of some sort were
moving about, in front and behind moved lines of troops; but why, whither,
and who they were, it was impossible to make out. These sights and sounds
had no depressing or intimidating effect on him; on the contrary, they
stimulated his energy and determination.
"Go on! Go on! Give it them!" he mentally exclaimed at these sounds, and
again proceeded to gallop along the line, penetrating farther and farther into
the region where the army was already in action.
"How it will be there I don't know, but all will be well!" thought Rostov.
After passing some Austrian troops he noticed that the next part of the line
(the Guards) was already in action.
"So much the better! I shall see it close," he thought.
He was riding almost along the front line. A handful of men came galloping
toward him. They were our uhlans who with disordered ranks were returning
from the attack. Rostov got out of their way, involuntarily noticed that one of
them was bleeding, and galloped on.
"That is no business of mine," he thought. He had not ridden many hundred
yards after that before he saw to his left, across the whole width of the field, an
enormous mass of cavalry in brilliant white uniforms, mounted on black
horses, trotting straight toward him and across his path. Rostov put his horse
to full gallop to get out of the way of these men, and he would have got clear
had they continued at the same speed, but they kept increasing their pace, so
that some of the horses were already galloping. Rostov heard the thud of their
hoofs and the jingle of their weapons and saw their horses, their figures, and
even their faces, more and more distinctly. They were our Horse Guards,
advancing to attack the French cavalry that was coming to meet them.
The Horse Guards were galloping, but still holding in their horses. Rostov
could already see their faces and heard the command: "Charge!" shouted by an
officer who was urging his thoroughbred to full speed. Rostov, fearing to be
crushed or swept into the attack on the French, galloped along the front as
hard as his horse could go, but still was not in time to avoid them.
The last of the Horse Guards, a huge pockmarked fellow, frowned angrily on
seeing Rostov before him, with whom he would inevitably collide. This
Guardsman would certainly have bowled Rostov and his Bedouin over
(Rostov felt himself quite tiny and weak compared to these gigantic men and
horses) had it not occurred to Rostov to flourish his whip before the eyes of
the Guardsman's horse. The heavy black horse, sixteen hands high, shied,
throwing back its ears; but the pockmarked Guardsman drove his huge spurs
in violently, and the horse, flourishing its tail and extending its neck, galloped
on yet faster. Hardly had the Horse Guards passed Rostov before he heard
them shout, "Hurrah!" and looking back saw that their foremost ranks were
mixed up with some foreign cavalry with red epaulets, probably French. He
could see nothing more, for immediately afterwards cannon began firing from
somewhere and smoke enveloped everything.
At that moment, as the Horse Guards, having passed him, disappeared in the
smoke, Rostov hesitated whether to gallop after them or to go where he was
sent. This was the brilliant charge of the Horse Guards that amazed the French
themselves. Rostov was horrified to hear later that of all that mass of huge and
handsome men, of all those brilliant, rich youths, officers and cadets, who had
galloped past him on their thousand-ruble horses, only eighteen were left after
the charge.
"Why should I envy them? My chance is not lost, and maybe I shall see the
Emperor immediately!" thought Rostov and galloped on.
When he came level with the Foot Guards he noticed that about them and
around them cannon balls were flying, of which he was aware not so much
because he heard their sound as because he saw uneasiness on the soldiers'
faces and unnatural warlike solemnity on those of the officers.
Passing behind one of the lines of a regiment of Foot Guards he heard a voice
calling him by name.
"Rostov!"
"What?" he answered, not recognizing Boris.
"I say, we've been in the front line! Our regiment attacked!" said Boris with
the happy smile seen on the faces of young men who have been under fire for
the first time.
Rostov stopped.
"Have you?" he said. "Well, how did it go?"
"We drove them back!" said Boris with animation, growing talkative. "Can
you imagine it?" and he began describing how the Guards, having taken up
their position and seeing troops before them, thought they were Austrians, and
all at once discovered from the cannon balls discharged by those troops that
they were themselves in the front line and had unexpectedly to go into action.
Rostov without hearing Boris to the end spurred his horse.
"Where are you off to?" asked Boris.
"With a message to His Majesty."
"There he is!" said Boris, thinking Rostov had said "His Highness," and
pointing to the Grand Duke who with his high shoulders and frowning brows
stood a hundred paces away from them in his helmet and Horse Guards'
jacket, shouting something to a pale, white uniformed Austrian officer.
"But that's the Grand Duke, and I want the commander-in-chief or the
Emperor," said Rostov, and was about to spur his horse.
"Count! Count!" shouted Berg who ran up from the other side as eager as
Boris. "Count! I am wounded in my right hand" (and he showed his bleeding
hand with a handkerchief tied round it) "and I remained at the front. I held my
sword in my left hand, Count. All our family—the von Bergs—have been
knights!"
He said something more, but Rostov did not wait to hear it and rode away.
Having passed the Guards and traversed an empty space, Rostov, to avoid
again getting in front of the first line as he had done when the Horse Guards
charged, followed the line of reserves, going far round the place where the
hottest musket fire and cannonade were heard. Suddenly he heard musket fire
quite close in front of him and behind our troops, where he could never have
expected the enemy to be.
"What can it be?" he thought. "The enemy in the rear of our army?
Impossible!" And suddenly he was seized by a panic of fear for himself and
for the issue of the whole battle. "But be that what it may," he reflected, "there
is no riding round it now. I must look for the commander in chief here, and if
all is lost it is for me to perish with the rest."
The foreboding of evil that had suddenly come over Rostov was more and
more confirmed the farther he rode into the region behind the village of
Pratzen, which was full of troops of all kinds.
"What does it mean? What is it? Whom are they firing at? Who is firing?"
Rostov kept asking as he came up to Russian and Austrian soldiers running in
confused crowds across his path.
"The devil knows! They've killed everybody! It's all up now!" he was told in
Russian, German, and Czech by the crowd of fugitives who understood what
was happening as little as he did.
"Kill the Germans!" shouted one.
"May the devil take them—the traitors!"
"Zum Henker diese Russen!" * muttered a German.
* "Hang these Russians!"
Several wounded men passed along the road, and words of abuse, screams,
and groans mingled in a general hubbub, then the firing died down. Rostov
learned later that Russian and Austrian soldiers had been firing at one another.
"My God! What does it all mean?" thought he. "And here, where at any
moment the Emperor may see them.... But no, these must be only a handful of
scoundrels. It will soon be over, it can't be that, it can't be! Only to get past
them quicker, quicker!"
The idea of defeat and flight could not enter Rostov's head. Though he saw
French cannon and French troops on the Pratzen Heights just where he had
been ordered to look for the commander-in-chief, he could not, did not wish
to, believe that.
CHAPTER XVIII
Rostov had been ordered to look for Kutuzov and the Emperor near the village
of Pratzen. But neither they nor a single commanding officer were there, only
disorganized crowds of troops of various kinds. He urged on his already weary
horse to get quickly past these crowds, but the farther he went the more
disorganized they were. The highroad on which he had come out was thronged
with caleches, carriages of all sorts, and Russian and Austrian soldiers of all
arms, some wounded and some not. This whole mass droned and jostled in
confusion under the dismal influence of cannon balls flying from the French
batteries stationed on the Pratzen Heights.
"Where is the Emperor? Where is Kutuzov?" Rostov kept asking everyone he
could stop, but got no answer from anyone.
At last seizing a soldier by his collar he forced him to answer.
"Eh, brother! They've all bolted long ago!" said the soldier, laughing for some
reason and shaking himself free.
Having left that soldier who was evidently drunk, Rostov stopped the horse of
a batman or groom of some important personage and began to question him.
The man announced that the Tsar had been driven in a carriage at full speed
about an hour before along that very road and that he was dangerously
wounded.
"It can't be!" said Rostov. "It must have been someone else."
"I saw him myself," replied the man with a self-confident smile of derision. "I
ought to know the Emperor by now, after the times I've seen him in
Petersburg. I saw him just as I see you.... There he sat in the carriage as pale as
anything. How they made the four black horses fly! Gracious me, they did
rattle past! It's time I knew the Imperial horses and Ilya Ivanych. I don't think
Ilya drives anyone except the Tsar!"
Rostov let go of the horse and was about to ride on, when a wounded officer
passing by addressed him:
"Who is it you want?" he asked. "The commander-in-chief? He was killed by a
cannon ball—struck in the breast before our regiment."
"Not killed—wounded!" another officer corrected him.
"Who? Kutuzov?" asked Rostov.
"Not Kutuzov, but what's his name—well, never mind... there are not many
left alive. Go that way, to that village, all the commanders are there," said the
officer, pointing to the village of Hosjeradek, and he walked on.
Rostov rode on at a footpace not knowing why or to whom he was now going.
The Emperor was wounded, the battle lost. It was impossible to doubt it now.
Rostov rode in the direction pointed out to him, in which he saw turrets and a
church. What need to hurry? What was he now to say to the Tsar or to
Kutuzov, even if they were alive and unwounded?
"Take this road, your honor, that way you will be killed at once!" a soldier
shouted to him. "They'd kill you there!"
"Oh, what are you talking about?" said another. "Where is he to go? That way
is nearer."
Rostov considered, and then went in the direction where they said he would be
killed.
"It's all the same now. If the Emperor is wounded, am I to try to save myself?"
he thought. He rode on to the region where the greatest number of men had
perished in fleeing from Pratzen. The French had not yet occupied that region,
and the Russians—the uninjured and slightly wounded—had left it long ago.
All about the field, like heaps of manure on well-kept plowland, lay from ten
to fifteen dead and wounded to each couple of acres. The wounded crept
together in twos and threes and one could hear their distressing screams and
groans, sometimes feigned—or so it seemed to Rostov. He put his horse to a
trot to avoid seeing all these suffering men, and he felt afraid—afraid not for
his life, but for the courage he needed and which he knew would not stand the
sight of these unfortunates.
The French, who had ceased firing at this field strewn with dead and wounded
where there was no one left to fire at, on seeing an adjutant riding over it
trained a gun on him and fired several shots. The sensation of those terrible
whistling sounds and of the corpses around him merged in Rostov's mind into
a single feeling of terror and pity for himself. He remembered his mother's last
letter. "What would she feel," thought he, "if she saw me here now on this
field with the cannon aimed at me?"
In the village of Hosjeradek there were Russian troops retiring from the field
of battle, who though still in some confusion were less disordered. The French
cannon did not reach there and the musketry fire sounded far away. Here
everyone clearly saw and said that the battle was lost. No one whom Rostov
asked could tell him where the Emperor or Kutuzov was. Some said the report
that the Emperor was wounded was correct, others that it was not, and
explained the false rumor that had spread by the fact that the Emperor's
carriage had really galloped from the field of battle with the pale and terrified
Ober-Hofmarschal Count Tolstoy, who had ridden out to the battlefield with
others in the Emperor's suite. One officer told Rostov that he had seen
someone from headquarters behind the village to the left, and thither Rostov
rode, not hoping to find anyone but merely to ease his conscience. When he
had ridden about two miles and had passed the last of the Russian troops, he
saw, near a kitchen garden with a ditch round it, two men on horseback facing
the ditch. One with a white plume in his hat seemed familiar to Rostov; the
other on a beautiful chestnut horse (which Rostov fancied he had seen before)
rode up to the ditch, struck his horse with his spurs, and giving it the rein
leaped lightly over. Only a little earth crumbled from the bank under the
horse's hind hoofs. Turning the horse sharply, he again jumped the ditch, and
deferentially addressed the horseman with the white plumes, evidently
suggesting that he should do the same. The rider, whose figure seemed
familiar to Rostov and involuntarily riveted his attention, made a gesture of
refusal with his head and hand and by that gesture Rostov instantly recognized
his lamented and adored monarch.
"But it can't be he, alone in the midst of this empty field!" thought Rostov. At
that moment Alexander turned his head and Rostov saw the beloved features
that were so deeply engraved on his memory. The Emperor was pale, his
cheeks sunken and his eyes hollow, but the charm, the mildness of his features,
was all the greater. Rostov was happy in the assurance that the rumors about
the Emperor being wounded were false. He was happy to be seeing him. He
knew that he might and even ought to go straight to him and give the message
Dolgorukov had ordered him to deliver.
But as a youth in love trembles, is unnerved, and dares not utter the thoughts
he has dreamed of for nights, but looks around for help or a chance of delay
and flight when the longed-for moment comes and he is alone with her, so
Rostov, now that he had attained what he had longed for more than anything
else in the world, did not know how to approach the Emperor, and a thousand
reasons occurred to him why it would be inconvenient, unseemly, and
impossible to do so.
"What! It is as if I were glad of a chance to take advantage of his being alone
and despondent! A strange face may seem unpleasant or painful to him at this
moment of sorrow; besides, what can I say to him now, when my heart fails
me and my mouth feels dry at the mere sight of him?" Not one of the
innumerable speeches addressed to the Emperor that he had composed in his
imagination could he now recall. Those speeches were intended for quite other
conditions, they were for the most part to be spoken at a moment of victory
and triumph, generally when he was dying of wounds and the sovereign had
thanked him for heroic deeds, and while dying he expressed the love his
actions had proved.
"Besides how can I ask the Emperor for his instructions for the right flank now
that it is nearly four o'clock and the battle is lost? No, certainly I must not
approach him, I must not intrude on his reflections. Better die a thousand
times than risk receiving an unkind look or bad opinion from him," Rostov
decided; and sorrowfully and with a heart full despair he rode away,
continually looking back at the Tsar, who still remained in the same attitude of
indecision.
While Rostov was thus arguing with himself and riding sadly away, Captain
von Toll chanced to ride to the same spot, and seeing the Emperor at once rode
up to him, offered his services, and assisted him to cross the ditch on foot. The
Emperor, wishing to rest and feeling unwell, sat down under an apple tree and
von Toll remained beside him. Rostov from a distance saw with envy and
remorse how von Toll spoke long and warmly to the Emperor and how the
Emperor, evidently weeping, covered his eyes with his hand and pressed von
Toll's hand.
"And I might have been in his place!" thought Rostov, and hardly restraining
his tears of pity for the Emperor, he rode on in utter despair, not knowing
where to or why he was now riding.
His despair was all the greater from feeling that his own weakness was the
cause of his grief.
He might... not only might but should, have gone up to the sovereign. It was a
unique chance to show his devotion to the Emperor and he had not made use
of it.... "What have I done?" thought he. And he turned round and galloped
back to the place where he had seen the Emperor, but there was no one beyond
the ditch now. Only some carts and carriages were passing by. From one of the
drivers he learned that Kutuzov's staff were not far off, in the village the
vehicles were going to. Rostov followed them. In front of him walked
Kutuzov's groom leading horses in horsecloths. Then came a cart, and behind
that walked an old, bandy-legged domestic serf in a peaked cap and sheepskin
coat.
"Tit! I say, Tit!" said the groom.
"What?" answered the old man absent-mindedly.
"Go, Tit! Thresh a bit!"
"Oh, you fool!" said the old man, spitting angrily. Some time passed in silence,
and then the same joke was repeated.
Before five in the evening the battle had been lost at all points. More than a
hundred cannon were already in the hands of the French.
Przebyszewski and his corps had laid down their arms. Other columns after
losing half their men were retreating in disorderly confused masses.
The remains of Langeron's and Dokhturov's mingled forces were crowding
around the dams and banks of the ponds near the village of Augesd.
After five o'clock it was only at the Augesd Dam that a hot cannonade
(delivered by the French alone) was still to be heard from numerous batteries
ranged on the slopes of the Pratzen Heights, directed at our retreating forces.
In the rearguard, Dokhturov and others rallying some battalions kept up a
musketry fire at the French cavalry that was pursuing our troops. It was
growing dusk. On the narrow Augesd Dam where for so many years the old
miller had been accustomed to sit in his tasseled cap peacefully angling, while
his grandson, with shirt sleeves rolled up, handled the floundering silvery fish
in the watering can, on that dam over which for so many years Moravians in
shaggy caps and blue jackets had peacefully driven their two-horse carts
loaded with wheat and had returned dusty with flour whitening their carts—on
that narrow dam amid the wagons and the cannon, under the horses' hoofs and
between the wagon wheels, men disfigured by fear of death now crowded
together, crushing one another, dying, stepping over the dying and killing one
another, only to move on a few steps and be killed themselves in the same
way.
Every ten seconds a cannon ball flew compressing the air around, or a shell
burst in the midst of that dense throng, killing some and splashing with blood
those near them.
Dolokhov—now an officer—wounded in the arm, and on foot, with the
regimental commander on horseback and some ten men of his company,
represented all that was left of that whole regiment. Impelled by the crowd,
they had got wedged in at the approach to the dam and, jammed in on all sides,
had stopped because a horse in front had fallen under a cannon and the crowd
were dragging it out. A cannon ball killed someone behind them, another fell
in front and splashed Dolokhov with blood. The crowd, pushing forward
desperately, squeezed together, moved a few steps, and again stopped.
"Move on a hundred yards and we are certainly saved, remain here another
two minutes and it is certain death," thought each one.
Dolokhov who was in the midst of the crowd forced his way to the edge of the
dam, throwing two soldiers off their feet, and ran onto the slippery ice that
covered the millpool.
"Turn this way!" he shouted, jumping over the ice which creaked under him;
"turn this way!" he shouted to those with the gun. "It bears!..."
The ice bore him but it swayed and creaked, and it was plain that it would give
way not only under a cannon or a crowd, but very soon even under his weight
alone. The men looked at him and pressed to the bank, hesitating to step onto
the ice. The general on horseback at the entrance to the dam raised his hand
and opened his mouth to address Dolokhov. Suddenly a cannon ball hissed so
low above the crowd that everyone ducked. It flopped into something moist,
and the general fell from his horse in a pool of blood. Nobody gave him a look
or thought of raising him.
"Get onto the ice, over the ice! Go on! Turn! Don't you hear? Go on!"
innumerable voices suddenly shouted after the ball had struck the general, the
men themselves not knowing what, or why, they were shouting.
One of the hindmost guns that was going onto the dam turned off onto the ice.
Crowds of soldiers from the dam began running onto the frozen pond. The ice
gave way under one of the foremost soldiers, and one leg slipped into the
water. He tried to right himself but fell in up to his waist. The nearest soldiers
shrank back, the gun driver stopped his horse, but from behind still came the
shouts: "Onto the ice, why do you stop? Go on! Go on!" And cries of horror
were heard in the crowd. The soldiers near the gun waved their arms and beat
the horses to make them turn and move on. The horses moved off the bank.
The ice, that had held under those on foot, collapsed in a great mass, and some
forty men who were on it dashed, some forward and some back, drowning one
another.
Still the cannon balls continued regularly to whistle and flop onto the ice and
into the water and oftenest of all among the crowd that covered the dam, the
pond, and the bank.
CHAPTER XIX
On the Pratzen Heights, where he had fallen with the flagstaff in his hand, lay
Prince Andrew Bolkonski bleeding profusely and unconsciously uttering a
gentle, piteous, and childlike moan.
Toward evening he ceased moaning and became quite still. He did not know
how long his unconsciousness lasted. Suddenly he again felt that he was alive
and suffering from a burning, lacerating pain in his head.
"Where is it, that lofty sky that I did not know till now, but saw today?" was
his first thought. "And I did not know this suffering either," he thought. "Yes, I
did not know anything, anything at all till now. But where am I?"
He listened and heard the sound of approaching horses, and voices speaking
French. He opened his eyes. Above him again was the same lofty sky with
clouds that had risen and were floating still higher, and between them gleamed
blue infinity. He did not turn his head and did not see those who, judging by
the sound of hoofs and voices, had ridden up and stopped near him.
It was Napoleon accompanied by two aides-de-camp. Bonaparte riding over
the battlefield had given final orders to strengthen the batteries firing at the
Augesd Dam and was looking at the killed and wounded left on the field.
"Fine men!" remarked Napoleon, looking at a dead Russian grenadier, who,
with his face buried in the ground and a blackened nape, lay on his stomach
with an already stiffened arm flung wide.
"The ammunition for the guns in position is exhausted, Your Majesty," said an
adjutant who had come from the batteries that were firing at Augesd.
"Have some brought from the reserve," said Napoleon, and having gone on a
few steps he stopped before Prince Andrew, who lay on his back with the
flagstaff that had been dropped beside him. (The flag had already been taken
by the French as a trophy.)
"That's a fine death!" said Napoleon as he gazed at Bolkonski.
Prince Andrew understood that this was said of him and that it was Napoleon
who said it. He heard the speaker addressed as Sire. But he heard the words as
he might have heard the buzzing of a fly. Not only did they not interest him,
but he took no notice of them and at once forgot them. His head was burning,
he felt himself bleeding to death, and he saw above him the remote, lofty, and
everlasting sky. He knew it was Napoleon—his hero—but at that moment
Napoleon seemed to him such a small, insignificant creature compared with
what was passing now between himself and that lofty infinite sky with the
clouds flying over it. At that moment it meant nothing to him who might be
standing over him, or what was said of him; he was only glad that people were
standing near him and only wished that they would help him and bring him
back to life, which seemed to him so beautiful now that he had today learned
to understand it so differently. He collected all his strength, to stir and utter a
sound. He feebly moved his leg and uttered a weak, sickly groan which
aroused his own pity.
"Ah! He is alive," said Napoleon. "Lift this young man up and carry him to the
dressing station."
Having said this, Napoleon rode on to meet Marshal Lannes, who, hat in hand,
rode up smiling to the Emperor to congratulate him on the victory.
Prince Andrew remembered nothing more: he lost consciousness from the
terrible pain of being lifted onto the stretcher, the jolting while being moved,
and the probing of his wound at the dressing station. He did not regain
consciousness till late in the day, when with other wounded and captured
Russian officers he was carried to the hospital. During this transfer he felt a
little stronger and was able to look about him and even speak.
The first words he heard on coming to his senses were those of a French
convoy officer, who said rapidly: "We must halt here: the Emperor will pass
here immediately; it will please him to see these gentlemen prisoners."
"There are so many prisoners today, nearly the whole Russian army, that he is
probably tired of them," said another officer.
"All the same! They say this one is the commander of all the Emperor
Alexander's Guards," said the first one, indicating a Russian officer in the
white uniform of the Horse Guards.
Bolkonski recognized Prince Repnin whom he had met in Petersburg society.
Beside him stood a lad of nineteen, also a wounded officer of the Horse
Guards.
Bonaparte, having come up at a gallop, stopped his horse.
"Which is the senior?" he asked, on seeing the prisoners.
They named the colonel, Prince Repnin.
"You are the commander of the Emperor Alexander's regiment of Horse
Guards?" asked Napoleon.
"I commanded a squadron," replied Repnin.
"Your regiment fulfilled its duty honorably," said Napoleon.
"The praise of a great commander is a soldier's highest reward," said Repnin.
"I bestow it with pleasure," said Napoleon. "And who is that young man
beside you?"
Prince Repnin named Lieutenant Sukhtelen.
After looking at him Napoleon smiled.
"He's very young to come to meddle with us."
"Youth is no hindrance to courage," muttered Sukhtelen in a failing voice.
"A splendid reply!" said Napoleon. "Young man, you will go far!"
Prince Andrew, who had also been brought forward before the Emperor's eyes
to complete the show of prisoners, could not fail to attract his attention.
Napoleon apparently remembered seeing him on the battlefield and,
addressing him, again used the epithet "young man" that was connected in his
memory with Prince Andrew.
"Well, and you, young man," said he. "How do you feel, mon brave?"
Though five minutes before, Prince Andrew had been able to say a few words
to the soldiers who were carrying him, now with his eyes fixed straight on
Napoleon, he was silent.... So insignificant at that moment seemed to him all
the interests that engrossed Napoleon, so mean did his hero himself with his
paltry vanity and joy in victory appear, compared to the lofty, equitable, and
kindly sky which he had seen and understood, that he could not answer him.
Everything seemed so futile and insignificant in comparison with the stern and
solemn train of thought that weakness from loss of blood, suffering, and the
nearness of death aroused in him. Looking into Napoleon's eyes Prince
Andrew thought of the insignificance of greatness, the unimportance of life
which no one could understand, and the still greater unimportance of death,
the meaning of which no one alive could understand or explain.
The Emperor without waiting for an answer turned away and said to one of the
officers as he went: "Have these gentlemen attended to and taken to my
bivouac; let my doctor, Larrey, examine their wounds. Au revoir, Prince
Repnin!" and he spurred his horse and galloped away.
His face shone with self-satisfaction and pleasure.
The soldiers who had carried Prince Andrew had noticed and taken the little
gold icon Princess Mary had hung round her brother's neck, but seeing the
favor the Emperor showed the prisoners, they now hastened to return the holy
image.
Prince Andrew did not see how and by whom it was replaced, but the little
icon with its thin gold chain suddenly appeared upon his chest outside his
uniform.
"It would be good," thought Prince Andrew, glancing at the icon his sister had
hung round his neck with such emotion and reverence, "it would be good if
everything were as clear and simple as it seems to Mary. How good it would
be to know where to seek for help in this life, and what to expect after it
beyond the grave! How happy and calm I should be if I could now say: 'Lord,
have mercy on me!'... But to whom should I say that? Either to a Power
indefinable, incomprehensible, which I not only cannot address but which I
cannot even express in words—the Great All or Nothing-" said he to himself,
"or to that God who has been sewn into this amulet by Mary! There is nothing
certain, nothing at all except the unimportance of everything I understand, and
the greatness of something incomprehensible but all-important."
The stretchers moved on. At every jolt he again felt unendurable pain; his
feverishness increased and he grew delirious. Visions of his father, wife, sister,
and future son, and the tenderness he had felt the night before the battle, the
figure of the insignificant little Napoleon, and above all this the lofty sky,
formed the chief subjects of his delirious fancies.
The quiet home life and peaceful happiness of Bald Hills presented itself to
him. He was already enjoying that happiness when that little Napoleon had
suddenly appeared with his unsympathizing look of shortsighted delight at the
misery of others, and doubts and torments had followed, and only the heavens
promised peace. Toward morning all these dreams melted and merged into the
chaos and darkness of unconciousness and oblivion which in the opinion of
Napoleon's doctor, Larrey, was much more likely to end in death than in
convalescence.
"He is a nervous, bilious subject," said Larrey, "and will not recover."
And Prince Andrew, with others fatally wounded, was left to the care of the
inhabitants of the district.
BOOK TEN: 1812
CHAPTER I
Napoleon began the war with Russia because he could not resist going to
Dresden, could not help having his head turned by the homage he received,
could not help donning a Polish uniform and yielding to the stimulating
influence of a June morning, and could not refrain from bursts of anger in the
presence of Kurakin and then of Balashev.
Alexander refused negotiations because he felt himself to be personally
insulted. Barclay de Tolly tried to command the army in the best way, because
he wished to fulfill his duty and earn fame as a great commander. Rostov
charged the French because he could not restrain his wish for a gallop across a
level field; and in the same way the innumerable people who took part in the
war acted in accord with their personal characteristics, habits, circumstances,
and aims. They were moved by fear or vanity, rejoiced or were indignant,
reasoned, imagining that they knew what they were doing and did it of their
own free will, but they all were involuntary tools of history, carrying on a
work concealed from them but comprehensible to us. Such is the inevitable
fate of men of action, and the higher they stand in the social hierarchy the less
are they free.
The actors of 1812 have long since left the stage, their personal interests have
vanished leaving no trace, and nothing remains of that time but its historic
results.
Providence compelled all these men, striving to attain personal aims, to further
the accomplishment of a stupendous result no one of them at all expected—
neither Napoleon, nor Alexander, nor still less any of those who did the actual
fighting.
The cause of the destruction of the French army in 1812 is clear to us now. No
one will deny that that cause was, on the one hand, its advance into the heart
of Russia late in the season without any preparation for a winter campaign
and, on the other, the character given to the war by the burning of Russian
towns and the hatred of the foe this aroused among the Russian people. But no
one at the time foresaw (what now seems so evident) that this was the only
way an army of eight hundred thousand men—the best in the world and led by
the best general—could be destroyed in conflict with a raw army of half its
numerical strength, and led by inexperienced commanders as the Russian
army was. Not only did no one see this, but on the Russian side every effort
was made to hinder the only thing that could save Russia, while on the French
side, despite Napoleon's experience and so-called military genius, every effort
was directed to pushing on to Moscow at the end of the summer, that is, to
doing the very thing that was bound to lead to destruction.
In historical works on the year 1812 French writers are very fond of saying
that Napoleon felt the danger of extending his line, that he sought a battle and
that his marshals advised him to stop at Smolensk, and of making similar
statements to show that the danger of the campaign was even then understood.
Russian authors are still fonder of telling us that from the commencement of
the campaign a Scythian war plan was adopted to lure Napoleon into the
depths of Russia, and this plan some of them attribute to Pfuel, others to a
certain Frenchman, others to Toll, and others again to Alexander himself—
pointing to notes, projects, and letters which contain hints of such a line of
action. But all these hints at what happened, both from the French side and the
Russian, are advanced only because they fit in with the event. Had that event
not occurred these hints would have been forgotten, as we have forgotten the
thousands and millions of hints and expectations to the contrary which were
current then but have now been forgotten because the event falsified them.
There are always so many conjectures as to the issue of any event that
however it may end there will always be people to say: "I said then that it
would be so," quite forgetting that amid their innumerable conjectures many
were to quite the contrary effect.
Conjectures as to Napoleon's awareness of the danger of extending his line,
and (on the Russian side) as to luring the enemy into the depths of Russia, are
evidently of that kind, and only by much straining can historians attribute such
conceptions to Napoleon and his marshals, or such plans to the Russian
commanders. All the facts are in flat contradiction to such conjectures. During
the whole period of the war not only was there no wish on the Russian side to
draw the French into the heart of the country, but from their first entry into
Russia everything was done to stop them. And not only was Napoleon not
afraid to extend his line, but he welcomed every step forward as a triumph and
did not seek battle as eagerly as in former campaigns, but very lazily.
At the very beginning of the war our armies were divided, and our sole aim
was to unite them, though uniting the armies was no advantage if we meant to
retire and lure the enemy into the depths of the country. Our Emperor joined
the army to encourage it to defend every inch of Russian soil and not to
retreat. The enormous Drissa camp was formed on Pfuel's plan, and there was
no intention of retiring farther. The Emperor reproached the commanders in
chief for every step they retired. He could not bear the idea of letting the
enemy even reach Smolensk, still less could he contemplate the burning of
Moscow, and when our armies did unite he was displeased that Smolensk was
abandoned and burned without a general engagement having been fought
under its walls.
So thought the Emperor, and the Russian commanders and people were still
more provoked at the thought that our forces were retreating into the depths of
the country.
Napoleon having cut our armies apart advanced far into the country and
missed several chances of forcing an engagement. In August he was at
Smolensk and thought only of how to advance farther, though as we now see
that advance was evidently ruinous to him.
The facts clearly show that Napoleon did not foresee the danger of the
advance on Moscow, nor did Alexander and the Russian commanders then
think of luring Napoleon on, but quite the contrary. The luring of Napoleon
into the depths of the country was not the result of any plan, for no one
believed it to be possible; it resulted from a most complex interplay of
intrigues, aims, and wishes among those who took part in the war and had no
perception whatever of the inevitable, or of the one way of saving Russia.
Everything came about fortuitously. The armies were divided at the
commencement of the campaign. We tried to unite them, with the evident
intention of giving battle and checking the enemy's advance, and by this effort
to unite them while avoiding battle with a much stronger enemy, and
necessarily withdrawing the armies at an acute angle—we led the French on to
Smolensk. But we withdrew at an acute angle not only because the French
advanced between our two armies; the angle became still more acute and we
withdrew still farther, because Barclay de Tolly was an unpopular foreigner
disliked by Bagration (who would come under his command), and Bagration
—being in command of the second army—tried to postpone joining up and
coming under Barclay's command as long as he could. Bagration was slow in
effecting the junction—though that was the chief aim of all at headquarters—
because, as he alleged, he exposed his army to danger on this march, and it
was best for him to retire more to the left and more to the south, worrying the
enemy from flank and rear and securing from the Ukraine recruits for his
army; and it looks as if he planned this in order not to come under the
command of the detested foreigner Barclay, whose rank was inferior to his
own.
The Emperor was with the army to encourage it, but his presence and
ignorance of what steps to take, and the enormous number of advisers and
plans, destroyed the first army's energy and it retired.
The intention was to make a stand at the Drissa camp, but Paulucci, aiming at
becoming commander-in-chief, unexpectedly employed his energy to
influence Alexander, and Pfuel's whole plan was abandoned and the command
entrusted to Barclay. But as Barclay did not inspire confidence his power was
limited. The armies were divided, there was no unity of command, and
Barclay was unpopular; but from this confusion, division, and the unpopularity
of the foreign commander-in-chief, there resulted on the one hand indecision
and the avoidance of a battle (which we could not have refrained from had the
armies been united and had someone else, instead of Barclay, been in
command) and on the other an ever-increasing indignation against the
foreigners and an increase in patriotic zeal.
At last the Emperor left the army, and as the most convenient and indeed the
only pretext for his departure it was decided that it was necessary for him to
inspire the people in the capitals and arouse the nation in general to a patriotic
war. And by this visit of the Emperor to Moscow the strength of the Russian
army was trebled.
He left in order not to obstruct the commander-in-chief's undivided control of
the army, and hoping that more decisive action would then be taken, but the
command of the armies became still more confused and enfeebled. Bennigsen,
the Tsarevich, and a swarm of adjutants general remained with the army to
keep the commander-in-chief under observation and arouse his energy, and
Barclay, feeling less free than ever under the observation of all these "eyes of
the Emperor," became still more cautious of undertaking any decisive action
and avoided giving battle.
Barclay stood for caution. The Tsarevich hinted at treachery and demanded a
general engagement. Lubomirski, Bronnitski, Wlocki, and the others of that
group stirred up so much trouble that Barclay, under pretext of sending papers
to the Emperor, dispatched these Polish adjutants general to Petersburg and
plunged into an open struggle with Bennigsen and the Tsarevich.
At Smolensk the armies at last reunited, much as Bagration disliked it.
Bagration drove up in a carriage to the house occupied by Barclay. Barclay
donned his sash and came out to meet and report to his senior officer
Bagration.
Despite his seniority in rank Bagration, in this contest of magnanimity, took
his orders from Barclay, but, having submitted, agreed with him less than ever.
By the Emperor's orders Bagration reported direct to him. He wrote to
Arakcheev, the Emperor's confidant: "It must be as my sovereign pleases, but I
cannot work with the Minister (meaning Barclay). For God's sake send me
somewhere else if only in command of a regiment. I cannot stand it here.
Headquarters are so full of Germans that a Russian cannot exist and there is no
sense in anything. I thought I was really serving my sovereign and the
Fatherland, but it turns out that I am serving Barclay. I confess I do not want
to."
The swarm of Bronnitskis and Wintzingerodes and their like still further
embittered the relations between the commanders in chief, and even less unity
resulted. Preparations were made to fight the French before Smolensk. A
general was sent to survey the position. This general, hating Barclay, rode to
visit a friend of his own, a corps commander, and, having spent the day with
him, returned to Barclay and condemned, as unsuitable from every point of
view, the battleground he had not seen.
While disputes and intrigues were going on about the future field of battle, and
while we were looking for the French—having lost touch with them—the
French stumbled upon Neverovski's division and reached the walls of
Smolensk.
It was necessary to fight an unexpected battle at Smolensk to save our lines of
communication. The battle was fought and thousands were killed on both
sides.
Smolensk was abandoned contrary to the wishes of the Emperor and of the
whole people. But Smolensk was burned by its own inhabitants-who had been
misled by their governor. And these ruined inhabitants, setting an example to
other Russians, went to Moscow thinking only of their own losses but kindling
hatred of the foe. Napoleon advanced farther and we retired, thus arriving at
the very result which caused his destruction.
CHAPTER II
The day after his son had left, Prince Nicholas sent for Princess Mary to come
to his study.
"Well? Are you satisfied now?" said he. "You've made me quarrel with my
son! Satisfied, are you? That's all you wanted! Satisfied?... It hurts me, it hurts.
I'm old and weak and this is what you wanted. Well then, gloat over it! Gloat
over it!"
After that Princess Mary did not see her father for a whole week. He was ill
and did not leave his study.
Princess Mary noticed to her surprise that during this illness the old prince not
only excluded her from his room, but did not admit Mademoiselle Bourienne
either. Tikhon alone attended him.
At the end of the week the prince reappeared and resumed his former way of
life, devoting himself with special activity to building operations and the
arrangement of the gardens and completely breaking off his relations with
Mademoiselle Bourienne. His looks and cold tone to his daughter seemed to
say: "There, you see? You plotted against me, you lied to Prince Andrew about
my relations with that Frenchwoman and made me quarrel with him, but you
see I need neither her nor you!"
Princess Mary spent half of every day with little Nicholas, watching his
lessons, teaching him Russian and music herself, and talking to Dessalles; the
rest of the day she spent over her books, with her old nurse, or with "God's
folk" who sometimes came by the back door to see her.
Of the war Princess Mary thought as women do think about wars. She feared
for her brother who was in it, was horrified by and amazed at the strange
cruelty that impels men to kill one another, but she did not understand the
significance of this war, which seemed to her like all previous wars. She did
not realize the significance of this war, though Dessalles with whom she
constantly conversed was passionately interested in its progress and tried to
explain his own conception of it to her, and though the "God's folk" who came
to see her reported, in their own way, the rumors current among the people of
an invasion by Antichrist, and though Julie (now Princess Drubetskaya), who
had resumed correspondence with her, wrote patriotic letters from Moscow.
"I write you in Russian, my good friend," wrote Julie in her Frenchified
Russian, "because I have a detestation for all the French, and the same for
their language which I cannot support to hear spoken.... We in Moscow are
elated by enthusiasm for our adored Emperor.
"My poor husband is enduring pains and hunger in Jewish taverns, but the
news which I have inspires me yet more.
"You heard probably of the heroic exploit of Raevski, embracing his two sons
and saying: 'I will perish with them but we will not be shaken!' And truly
though the enemy was twice stronger than we, we were unshakable. We pass
the time as we can, but in war as in war! The princesses Aline and Sophie sit
whole days with me, and we, unhappy widows of live men, make beautiful
conversations over our 'charpie', only you, my friend, are missing..." and so
on.
The chief reason Princess Mary did not realize the full significance of this war
was that the old prince never spoke of it, did not recognize it, and laughed at
Dessalles when he mentioned it at dinner. The prince's tone was so calm and
confident that Princess Mary unhesitatingly believed him.
All that July the old prince was exceedingly active and even animated. He
planned another garden and began a new building for the domestic serfs. The
only thing that made Princess Mary anxious about him was that he slept very
little and, instead of sleeping in his study as usual, changed his sleeping place
every day. One day he would order his camp bed to be set up in the glass
gallery, another day he remained on the couch or on the lounge chair in the
drawing room and dozed there without undressing, while—instead of
Mademoiselle Bourienne—a serf boy read to him. Then again he would spend
a night in the dining room.
On August 1, a second letter was received from Prince Andrew. In his first
letter which came soon after he had left home, Prince Andrew had dutifully
asked his father's forgiveness for what he had allowed himself to say and
begged to be restored to his favor. To this letter the old prince had replied
affectionately, and from that time had kept the Frenchwoman at a distance.
Prince Andrew's second letter, written near Vitebsk after the French had
occupied that town, gave a brief account of the whole campaign, enclosed for
them a plan he had drawn and forecasts as to the further progress of the war. In
this letter Prince Andrew pointed out to his father the danger of staying at Bald
Hills, so near the theater of war and on the army's direct line of march, and
advised him to move to Moscow.
At dinner that day, on Dessalles' mentioning that the French were said to have
already entered Vitebsk, the old prince remembered his son's letter.
"There was a letter from Prince Andrew today," he said to Princess Mary
—"Haven't you read it?"
"No, Father," she replied in a frightened voice.
She could not have read the letter as she did not even know it had arrived.
"He writes about this war," said the prince, with the ironic smile that had
become habitual to him in speaking of the present war.
"That must be very interesting," said Dessalles. "Prince Andrew is in a
position to know..."
"Oh, very interesting!" said Mademoiselle Bourienne.
"Go and get it for me," said the old prince to Mademoiselle Bourienne. "You
know—under the paperweight on the little table."
Mademoiselle Bourienne jumped up eagerly.
"No, don't!" he exclaimed with a frown. "You go, Michael Ivanovich."
Michael Ivanovich rose and went to the study. But as soon as he had left the
room the old prince, looking uneasily round, threw down his napkin and went
himself.
"They can't do anything... always make some muddle," he muttered.
While he was away Princess Mary, Dessalles, Mademoiselle Bourienne, and
even little Nicholas exchanged looks in silence. The old prince returned with
quick steps, accompanied by Michael Ivanovich, bringing the letter and a plan.
These he put down beside him—not letting anyone read them at dinner.
On moving to the drawing room he handed the letter to Princess Mary and,
spreading out before him the plan of the new building and fixing his eyes upon
it, told her to read the letter aloud. When she had done so Princess Mary
looked inquiringly at her father. He was examining the plan, evidently
engrossed in his own ideas.
"What do you think of it, Prince?" Dessalles ventured to ask.
"I? I?..." said the prince as if unpleasantly awakened, and not taking his eyes
from the plan of the building.
"Very possibly the theater of war will move so near to us that..."
"Ha ha ha! The theater of war!" said the prince. "I have said and still say that
the theater of war is Poland and the enemy will never get beyond the Niemen."
Dessalles looked in amazement at the prince, who was talking of the Niemen
when the enemy was already at the Dnieper, but Princess Mary, forgetting the
geographical position of the Niemen, thought that what her father was saying
was correct.
"When the snow melts they'll sink in the Polish swamps. Only they could fail
to see it," the prince continued, evidently thinking of the campaign of 1807
which seemed to him so recent. "Bennigsen should have advanced into Prussia
sooner, then things would have taken a different turn..."
"But, Prince," Dessalles began timidly, "the letter mentions Vitebsk...."
"Ah, the letter? Yes..." replied the prince peevishly. "Yes... yes..." His face
suddenly took on a morose expression. He paused. "Yes, he writes that the
French were beaten at... at... what river is it?"
Dessalles dropped his eyes.
"The prince says nothing about that," he remarked gently.
"Doesn't he? But I didn't invent it myself."
No one spoke for a long time.
"Yes... yes... Well, Michael Ivanovich," he suddenly went on, raising his head
and pointing to the plan of the building, "tell me how you mean to alter it...."
Michael Ivanovich went up to the plan, and the prince after speaking to him
about the building looked angrily at Princess Mary and Dessalles and went to
his own room.
Princess Mary saw Dessalles' embarrassed and astonished look fixed on her
father, noticed his silence, and was struck by the fact that her father had
forgotten his son's letter on the drawing-room table; but she was not only
afraid to speak of it and ask Dessalles the reason of his confusion and silence,
but was afraid even to think about it.
In the evening Michael Ivanovich, sent by the prince, came to Princess Mary
for Prince Andrew's letter which had been forgotten in the drawing room. She
gave it to him and, unpleasant as it was to her to do so, ventured to ask him
what her father was doing.
"Always busy," replied Michael Ivanovich with a respectfully ironic smile
which caused Princess Mary to turn pale. "He's worrying very much about the
new building. He has been reading a little, but now"—Michael Ivanovich went
on, lowering his voice—"now he's at his desk, busy with his will, I expect."
(One of the prince's favorite occupations of late had been the preparation of
some papers he meant to leave at his death and which he called his "will.")
"And Alpatych is being sent to Smolensk?" asked Princess Mary.
"Oh, yes, he has been waiting to start for some time."
CHAPTER III
When Michael Ivanovich returned to the study with the letter, the old prince,
with spectacles on and a shade over his eyes, was sitting at his open bureau
with screened candles, holding a paper in his outstretched hand, and in a
somewhat dramatic attitude was reading his manuscript—his "Remarks" as he
termed it—which was to be transmitted to the Emperor after his death.
When Michael Ivanovich went in there were tears in the prince's eyes evoked
by the memory of the time when the paper he was now reading had been
written. He took the letter from Michael Ivanovich's hand, put it in his pocket,
folded up his papers, and called in Alpatych who had long been waiting.
The prince had a list of things to be bought in Smolensk and, walking up and
down the room past Alpatych who stood by the door, he gave his instructions.
"First, notepaper—do you hear? Eight quires, like this sample, gilt-edged... it
must be exactly like the sample. Varnish, sealing wax, as in Michael
Ivanovich's list."
He paced up and down for a while and glanced at his notes.
"Then hand to the governor in person a letter about the deed."
Next, bolts for the doors of the new building were wanted and had to be of a
special shape the prince had himself designed, and a leather case had to be
ordered to keep the "will" in.
The instructions to Alpatych took over two hours and still the prince did not
let him go. He sat down, sank into thought, closed his eyes, and dozed off.
Alpatych made a slight movement.
"Well, go, go! If anything more is wanted I'll send after you."
Alpatych went out. The prince again went to his bureau, glanced into it,
fingered his papers, closed the bureau again, and sat down at the table to write
to the governor.
It was already late when he rose after sealing the letter. He wished to sleep, but
he knew he would not be able to and that most depressing thoughts came to
him in bed. So he called Tikhon and went through the rooms with him to show
him where to set up the bed for that night.
He went about looking at every corner. Every place seemed unsatisfactory, but
worst of all was his customary couch in the study. That couch was dreadful to
him, probably because of the oppressive thoughts he had had when lying there.
It was unsatisfactory everywhere, but the corner behind the piano in the sitting
room was better than other places: he had never slept there yet.
With the help of a footman Tikhon brought in the bedstead and began putting
it up.
"That's not right! That's not right!" cried the prince, and himself pushed it a
few inches from the corner and then closer in again.
"Well, at last I've finished, now I'll rest," thought the prince, and let Tikhon
undress him.
Frowning with vexation at the effort necessary to divest himself of his coat
and trousers, the prince undressed, sat down heavily on the bed, and appeared
to be meditating as he looked contemptuously at his withered yellow legs. He
was not meditating, but only deferring the moment of making the effort to lift
those legs up and turn over on the bed. "Ugh, how hard it is! Oh, that this toil
might end and you would release me!" thought he. Pressing his lips together
he made that effort for the twenty-thousandth time and lay down. But hardly
had he done so before he felt the bed rocking backwards and forwards beneath
him as if it were breathing heavily and jolting. This happened to him almost
every night. He opened his eyes as they were closing.
"No peace, damn them!" he muttered, angry he knew not with whom. "Ah yes,
there was something else important, very important, that I was keeping till I
should be in bed. The bolts? No, I told him about them. No, it was something,
something in the drawing room. Princess Mary talked some nonsense.
Dessalles, that fool, said something. Something in my pocket—can't
remember..."
"Tikhon, what did we talk about at dinner?"
"About Prince Michael..."
"Be quiet, quiet!" The prince slapped his hand on the table. "Yes, I know,
Prince Andrew's letter! Princess Mary read it. Dessalles said something about
Vitebsk. Now I'll read it."
He had the letter taken from his pocket and the table—on which stood a glass
of lemonade and a spiral wax candle—moved close to the bed, and putting on
his spectacles he began reading. Only now in the stillness of the night, reading
it by the faint light under the green shade, did he grasp its meaning for a
moment.
"The French at Vitebsk, in four days' march they may be at Smolensk; perhaps
are already there! Tikhon!" Tikhon jumped up. "No, no, I don't want
anything!" he shouted.
He put the letter under the candlestick and closed his eyes. And there rose
before him the Danube at bright noonday: reeds, the Russian camp, and
himself a young general without a wrinkle on his ruddy face, vigorous and
alert, entering Potemkin's gaily colored tent, and a burning sense of jealousy
of "the favorite" agitated him now as strongly as it had done then. He recalled
all the words spoken at that first meeting with Potemkin. And he saw before
him a plump, rather sallow-faced, short, stout woman, the Empress Mother,
with her smile and her words at her first gracious reception of him, and then
that same face on the catafalque, and the encounter he had with Zubov over
her coffin about his right to kiss her hand.
"Oh, quicker, quicker! To get back to that time and have done with all the
present! Quicker, quicker—and that they should leave me in peace!"
CHAPTER IV
Bald Hills, Prince Nicholas Bolkonski's estate, lay forty miles east from
Smolensk and two miles from the main road to Moscow.
The same evening that the prince gave his instructions to Alpatych, Dessalles,
having asked to see Princess Mary, told her that, as the prince was not very
well and was taking no steps to secure his safety, though from Prince Andrew's
letter it was evident that to remain at Bald Hills might be dangerous, he
respectfully advised her to send a letter by Alpatych to the Provincial
Governor at Smolensk, asking him to let her know the state of affairs and the
extent of the danger to which Bald Hills was exposed. Dessalles wrote this
letter to the Governor for Princess Mary, she signed it, and it was given to
Alpatych with instructions to hand it to the Governor and to come back as
quickly as possible if there was danger.
Having received all his orders Alpatych, wearing a white beaver hat—a
present from the prince—and carrying a stick as the prince did, went out
accompanied by his family. Three well-fed roans stood ready harnessed to a
small conveyance with a leather hood.
The larger bell was muffled and the little bells on the harness stuffed with
paper. The prince allowed no one at Bald Hills to drive with ringing bells; but
on a long journey Alpatych liked to have them. His satellites—the senior
clerk, a countinghouse clerk, a scullery maid, a cook, two old women, a little
pageboy, the coachman, and various domestic serfs—were seeing him off.
His daughter placed chintz-covered down cushions for him to sit on and
behind his back. His old sister-in-law popped in a small bundle, and one of the
coachmen helped him into the vehicle.
"There! There! Women's fuss! Women, women!" said Alpatych, puffing and
speaking rapidly just as the prince did, and he climbed into the trap.
After giving the clerk orders about the work to be done, Alpatych, not trying
to imitate the prince now, lifted the hat from his bald head and crossed himself
three times.
"If there is anything... come back, Yakov Alpatych! For Christ's sake think of
us!" cried his wife, referring to the rumors of war and the enemy.
"Women, women! Women's fuss!" muttered Alpatych to himself and started
on his journey, looking round at the fields of yellow rye and the still-green,
thickly growing oats, and at other quite black fields just being plowed a
second time.
As he went along he looked with pleasure at the year's splendid crop of corn,
scrutinized the strips of ryefield which here and there were already being
reaped, made his calculations as to the sowing and the harvest, and asked
himself whether he had not forgotten any of the prince's orders.
Having baited the horses twice on the way, he arrived at the town toward
evening on the fourth of August.
Alpatych kept meeting and overtaking baggage trains and troops on the road.
As he approached Smolensk he heard the sounds of distant firing, but these did
not impress him. What struck him most was the sight of a splendid field of
oats in which a camp had been pitched and which was being mown down by
the soldiers, evidently for fodder. This fact impressed Alpatych, but in
thinking about his own business he soon forgot it.
All the interests of his life for more than thirty years had been bounded by the
will of the prince, and he never went beyond that limit. Everything not
connected with the execution of the prince's orders did not interest and did not
even exist for Alpatych.
On reaching Smolensk on the evening of the fourth of August he put up in the
Gachina suburb across the Dnieper, at the inn kept by Ferapontov, where he
had been in the habit of putting up for the last thirty years. Some thirty years
ago Ferapontov, by Alpatych's advice, had bought a wood from the prince, had
begun to trade, and now had a house, an inn, and a corn dealer's shop in that
province. He was a stout, dark, red-faced peasant in the forties, with thick lips,
a broad knob of a nose, similar knobs over his black frowning brows, and a
round belly.
Wearing a waistcoat over his cotton shirt, Ferapontov was standing before his
shop which opened onto the street. On seeing Alpatych he went up to him.
"You're welcome, Yakov Alpatych. Folks are leaving the town, but you have
come to it," said he.
"Why are they leaving the town?" asked Alpatych.
"That's what I say. Folks are foolish! Always afraid of the French."
"Women's fuss, women's fuss!" said Alpatych.
"Just what I think, Yakov Alpatych. What I say is: orders have been given not
to let them in, so that must be right. And the peasants are asking three rubles
for carting—it isn't Christian!"
Yakov Alpatych heard without heeding. He asked for a samovar and for hay
for his horses, and when he had had his tea he went to bed.
All night long troops were moving past the inn. Next morning Alpatych
donned a jacket he wore only in town and went out on business. It was a sunny
morning and by eight o'clock it was already hot. "A good day for harvesting,"
thought Alpatych.
From beyond the town firing had been heard since early morning. At eight
o'clock the booming of cannon was added to the sound of musketry. Many
people were hurrying through the streets and there were many soldiers, but
cabs were still driving about, tradesmen stood at their shops, and service was
being held in the churches as usual. Alpatych went to the shops, to
government offices, to the post office, and to the Governor's. In the offices and
shops and at the post office everyone was talking about the army and about the
enemy who was already attacking the town, everybody was asking what
should be done, and all were trying to calm one another.
In front of the Governor's house Alpatych found a large number of people,
Cossacks, and a traveling carriage of the Governor's. At the porch he met two
of the landed gentry, one of whom he knew. This man, an ex-captain of police,
was saying angrily:
"It's no joke, you know! It's all very well if you're single. 'One man though
undone is but one,' as the proverb says, but with thirteen in your family and all
the property... They've brought us to utter ruin! What sort of governors are
they to do that? They ought to be hanged—the brigands!..."
"Oh come, that's enough!" said the other.
"What do I care? Let him hear! We're not dogs," said the ex-captain of police,
and looking round he noticed Alpatych.
"Oh, Yakov Alpatych! What have you come for?"
"To see the Governor by his excellency's order," answered Alpatych, lifting his
head and proudly thrusting his hand into the bosom of his coat as he always
did when he mentioned the prince.... "He has ordered me to inquire into the
position of affairs," he added.
"Yes, go and find out!" shouted the angry gentleman. "They've brought things
to such a pass that there are no carts or anything!... There it is again, do you
hear?" said he, pointing in the direction whence came the sounds of firing.
"They've brought us all to ruin... the brigands!" he repeated, and descended the
porch steps.
Alpatych swayed his head and went upstairs. In the waiting room were
tradesmen, women, and officials, looking silently at one another. The door of
the Governor's room opened and they all rose and moved forward. An official
ran out, said some words to a merchant, called a stout official with a cross
hanging on his neck to follow him, and vanished again, evidently wishing to
avoid the inquiring looks and questions addressed to him. Alpatych moved
forward and next time the official came out addressed him, one hand placed in
the breast of his buttoned coat, and handed him two letters.
"To his Honor Baron Asch, from General-in-Chief Prince Bolkonski," he
announced with such solemnity and significance that the official turned to him
and took the letters.
A few minutes later the Governor received Alpatych and hurriedly said to him:
"Inform the prince and princess that I knew nothing: I acted on the highest
instructions—here..." and he handed a paper to Alpatych. "Still, as the prince
is unwell my advice is that they should go to Moscow. I am just starting
myself. Inform them..."
But the Governor did not finish: a dusty perspiring officer ran into the room
and began to say something in French. The Governor's face expressed terror.
"Go," he said, nodding his head to Alpatych, and began questioning the
officer.
Eager, frightened, helpless glances were turned on Alpatych when he came out
of the Governor's room. Involuntarily listening now to the firing, which had
drawn nearer and was increasing in strength, Alpatych hurried to his inn. The
paper handed to him by the Governor said this:
"I assure you that the town of Smolensk is not in the slightest danger as yet
and it is unlikely that it will be threatened with any. I from the one side and
Prince Bagration from the other are marching to unite our forces before
Smolensk, which junction will be effected on the 22nd instant, and both
armies with their united forces will defend our compatriots of the province
entrusted to your care till our efforts shall have beaten back the enemies of our
Fatherland, or till the last warrior in our valiant ranks has perished. From this
you will see that you have a perfect right to reassure the inhabitants of
Smolensk, for those defended by two such brave armies may feel assured of
victory." (Instructions from Barclay de Tolly to Baron Asch, the civil governor
of Smolensk, 1812.)
People were anxiously roaming about the streets.
Carts piled high with household utensils, chairs, and cupboards kept emerging
from the gates of the yards and moving along the streets. Loaded carts stood at
the house next to Ferapontov's and women were wailing and lamenting as they
said good-by. A small watchdog ran round barking in front of the harnessed
horses.
Alpatych entered the innyard at a quicker pace than usual and went straight to
the shed where his horses and trap were. The coachman was asleep. He woke
him up, told him to harness, and went into the passage. From the host's room
came the sounds of a child crying, the despairing sobs of a woman, and the
hoarse angry shouting of Ferapontov. The cook began running hither and
thither in the passage like a frightened hen, just as Alpatych entered.
"He's done her to death. Killed the mistress!... Beat her... dragged her about
so!..."
"What for?" asked Alpatych.
"She kept begging to go away. She's a woman! 'Take me away,' says she, 'don't
let me perish with my little children! Folks,' she says, 'are all gone, so why,'
she says, 'don't we go?' And he began beating and pulling her about so!"
At these words Alpatych nodded as if in approval, and not wishing to hear
more went to the door of the room opposite the innkeeper's, where he had left
his purchases.
"You brute, you murderer!" screamed a thin, pale woman who, with a baby in
her arms and her kerchief torn from her head, burst through the door at that
moment and down the steps into the yard.
Ferapontov came out after her, but on seeing Alpatych adjusted his waistcoat,
smoothed his hair, yawned, and followed Alpatych into the opposite room.
"Going already?" said he.
Alpatych, without answering or looking at his host, sorted his packages and
asked how much he owed.
"We'll reckon up! Well, have you been to the Governor's?" asked Ferapontov.
"What has been decided?"
Alpatych replied that the Governor had not told him anything definite.
"With our business, how can we get away?" said Ferapontov. "We'd have to
pay seven rubles a cartload to Dorogobuzh and I tell them they're not
Christians to ask it! Selivanov, now, did a good stroke last Thursday—sold
flour to the army at nine rubles a sack. Will you have some tea?" he added.
While the horses were being harnessed Alpatych and Ferapontov over their tea
talked of the price of corn, the crops, and the good weather for harvesting.
"Well, it seems to be getting quieter," remarked Ferapontov, finishing his third
cup of tea and getting up. "Ours must have got the best of it. The orders were
not to let them in. So we're in force, it seems.... They say the other day
Matthew Ivanych Platov drove them into the river Marina and drowned some
eighteen thousand in one day."
Alpatych collected his parcels, handed them to the coachman who had come
in, and settled up with the innkeeper. The noise of wheels, hoofs, and bells was
heard from the gateway as a little trap passed out.
It was by now late in the afternoon. Half the street was in shadow, the other
half brightly lit by the sun. Alpatych looked out of the window and went to the
door. Suddenly the strange sound of a far-off whistling and thud was heard,
followed by a boom of cannon blending into a dull roar that set the windows
rattling.
He went out into the street: two men were running past toward the bridge.
From different sides came whistling sounds and the thud of cannon balls and
bursting shells falling on the town. But these sounds were hardly heard in
comparison with the noise of the firing outside the town and attracted little
attention from the inhabitants. The town was being bombarded by a hundred
and thirty guns which Napoleon had ordered up after four o'clock. The people
did not at once realize the meaning of this bombardment.
At first the noise of the falling bombs and shells only aroused curiosity.
Ferapontov's wife, who till then had not ceased wailing under the shed,
became quiet and with the baby in her arms went to the gate, listening to the
sounds and looking in silence at the people.
The cook and a shop assistant came to the gate. With lively curiosity everyone
tried to get a glimpse of the projectiles as they flew over their heads. Several
people came round the corner talking eagerly.
"What force!" remarked one. "Knocked the roof and ceiling all to splinters!"
"Routed up the earth like a pig," said another.
"That's grand, it bucks one up!" laughed the first. "Lucky you jumped aside, or
it would have wiped you out!"
Others joined those men and stopped and told how cannon balls had fallen on
a house close to them. Meanwhile still more projectiles, now with the swift
sinister whistle of a cannon ball, now with the agreeable intermittent whistle
of a shell, flew over people's heads incessantly, but not one fell close by, they
all flew over. Alpatych was getting into his trap. The innkeeper stood at the
gate.
"What are you staring at?" he shouted to the cook, who in her red skirt, with
sleeves rolled up, swinging her bare elbows, had stepped to the corner to listen
to what was being said.
"What marvels!" she exclaimed, but hearing her master's voice she turned
back, pulling down her tucked-up skirt.
Once more something whistled, but this time quite close, swooping
downwards like a little bird; a flame flashed in the middle of the street,
something exploded, and the street was shrouded in smoke.
"Scoundrel, what are you doing?" shouted the innkeeper, rushing to the cook.
At that moment the pitiful wailing of women was heard from different sides,
the frightened baby began to cry, and people crowded silently with pale faces
round the cook. The loudest sound in that crowd was her wailing.
"Oh-h-h! Dear souls, dear kind souls! Don't let me die! My good souls!..."
Five minutes later no one remained in the street. The cook, with her thigh
broken by a shell splinter, had been carried into the kitchen. Alpatych, his
coachman, Ferapontov's wife and children and the house porter were all sitting
in the cellar, listening. The roar of guns, the whistling of projectiles, and the
piteous moaning of the cook, which rose above the other sounds, did not cease
for a moment. The mistress rocked and hushed her baby and when anyone
came into the cellar asked in a pathetic whisper what had become of her
husband who had remained in the street. A shopman who entered told her that
her husband had gone with others to the cathedral, whence they were fetching
the wonder-working icon of Smolensk.
Toward dusk the cannonade began to subside. Alpatych left the cellar and
stopped in the doorway. The evening sky that had been so clear was clouded
with smoke, through which, high up, the sickle of the new moon shone
strangely. Now that the terrible din of the guns had ceased a hush seemed to
reign over the town, broken only by the rustle of footsteps, the moaning, the
distant cries, and the crackle of fires which seemed widespread everywhere.
The cook's moans had now subsided. On two sides black curling clouds of
smoke rose and spread from the fires. Through the streets soldiers in various
uniforms walked or ran confusedly in different directions like ants from a
ruined ant-hill. Several of them ran into Ferapontov's yard before Alpatych's
eyes. Alpatych went out to the gate. A retreating regiment, thronging and
hurrying, blocked the street.
Noticing him, an officer said: "The town is being abandoned. Get away, get
away!" and then, turning to the soldiers, shouted:
"I'll teach you to run into the yards!"
Alpatych went back to the house, called the coachman, and told him to set off.
Ferapontov's whole household came out too, following Alpatych and the
coachman. The women, who had been silent till then, suddenly began to wail
as they looked at the fires—the smoke and even the flames of which could be
seen in the failing twilight—and as if in reply the same kind of lamentation
was heard from other parts of the street. Inside the shed Alpatych and the
coachman arranged the tangled reins and traces of their horses with trembling
hands.
As Alpatych was driving out of the gate he saw some ten soldiers in
Ferapontov's open shop, talking loudly and filling their bags and knapsacks
with flour and sunflower seeds. Just then Ferapontov returned and entered his
shop. On seeing the soldiers he was about to shout at them, but suddenly
stopped and, clutching at his hair, burst into sobs and laughter:
"Loot everything, lads! Don't let those devils get it!" he cried, taking some
bags of flour himself and throwing them into the street.
Some of the soldiers were frightened and ran away, others went on filling their
bags. On seeing Alpatych, Ferapontov turned to him:
"Russia is done for!" he cried. "Alpatych, I'll set the place on fire myself.
We're done for!..." and Ferapontov ran into the yard.
Soldiers were passing in a constant stream along the street blocking it
completely, so that Alpatych could not pass out and had to wait. Ferapontov's
wife and children were also sitting in a cart waiting till it was possible to drive
out.
Night had come. There were stars in the sky and the new moon shone out amid
the smoke that screened it. On the sloping descent to the Dnieper Alpatych's
cart and that of the innkeeper's wife, which were slowly moving amid the rows
of soldiers and of other vehicles, had to stop. In a side street near the
crossroads where the vehicles had stopped, a house and some shops were on
fire. This fire was already burning itself out. The flames now died down and
were lost in the black smoke, now suddenly flared up again brightly, lighting
up with strange distinctness the faces of the people crowding at the crossroads.
Black figures flitted about before the fire, and through the incessant crackling
of the flames talking and shouting could be heard. Seeing that his trap would
not be able to move on for some time, Alpatych got down and turned into the
side street to look at the fire. Soldiers were continually rushing backwards and
forwards near it, and he saw two of them and a man in a frieze coat dragging
burning beams into another yard across the street, while others carried bundles
of hay.
Alpatych went up to a large crowd standing before a high barn which was
blazing briskly. The walls were all on fire and the back wall had fallen in, the
wooden roof was collapsing, and the rafters were alight. The crowd was
evidently watching for the roof to fall in, and Alpatych watched for it too.
"Alpatych!" a familiar voice suddenly hailed the old man.
"Mercy on us! Your excellency!" answered Alpatych, immediately
recognizing the voice of his young prince.
Prince Andrew in his riding cloak, mounted on a black horse, was looking at
Alpatych from the back of the crowd.
"Why are you here?" he asked.
"Your... your excellency," stammered Alpatych and broke into sobs. "Are we
really lost? Master!..."
"Why are you here?" Prince Andrew repeated.
At that moment the flames flared up and showed his young master's pale worn
face. Alpatych told how he had been sent there and how difficult it was to get
away.
"Are we really quite lost, your excellency?" he asked again.
Prince Andrew without replying took out a notebook and raising his knee
began writing in pencil on a page he tore out. He wrote to his sister:
"Smolensk is being abandoned. Bald Hills will be occupied by the enemy
within a week. Set off immediately for Moscow. Let me know at once when
you will start. Send by special messenger to Usvyazh."
Having written this and given the paper to Alpatych, he told him how to
arrange for departure of the prince, the princess, his son, and the boy's tutor,
and how and where to let him know immediately. Before he had had time to
finish giving these instructions, a chief of staff followed by a suite galloped up
to him.
"You are a colonel?" shouted the chief of staff with a German accent, in a
voice familiar to Prince Andrew. "Houses are set on fire in your presence and
you stand by! What does this mean? You will answer for it!" shouted Berg,
who was now assistant to the chief of staff of the commander of the left flank
of the infantry of the first army, a place, as Berg said, "very agreeable and well
en evidence."
Prince Andrew looked at him and without replying went on speaking to
Alpatych.
"So tell them that I shall await a reply till the tenth, and if by the tenth I don't
receive news that they have all got away I shall have to throw up everything
and come myself to Bald Hills."
"Prince," said Berg, recognizing Prince Andrew, "I only spoke because I have
to obey orders, because I always do obey exactly.... You must please excuse
me," he went on apologetically.
Something cracked in the flames. The fire died down for a moment and
wreaths of black smoke rolled from under the roof. There was another terrible
crash and something huge collapsed.
"Ou-rou-rou!" yelled the crowd, echoing the crash of the collapsing roof of the
barn, the burning grain in which diffused a cakelike aroma all around. The
flames flared up again, lighting the animated, delighted, exhausted faces of the
spectators.
The man in the frieze coat raised his arms and shouted:
"It's fine, lads! Now it's raging... It's fine!"
"That's the owner himself," cried several voices.
"Well then," continued Prince Andrew to Alpatych, "report to them as I have
told you"; and not replying a word to Berg who was now mute beside him, he
touched his horse and rode down the side street.
CHAPTER V
From Smolensk the troops continued to retreat, followed by the enemy. On the
tenth of August the regiment Prince Andrew commanded was marching along
the highroad past the avenue leading to Bald Hills. Heat and drought had
continued for more than three weeks. Each day fleecy clouds floated across
the sky and occasionally veiled the sun, but toward evening the sky cleared
again and the sun set in reddish-brown mist. Heavy night dews alone refreshed
the earth. The unreaped corn was scorched and shed its grain. The marshes
dried up. The cattle lowed from hunger, finding no food on the sun-parched
meadows. Only at night and in the forests while the dew lasted was there any
freshness. But on the road, the highroad along which the troops marched, there
was no such freshness even at night or when the road passed through the
forest; the dew was imperceptible on the sandy dust churned up more than six
inches deep. As soon as day dawned the march began. The artillery and
baggage wagons moved noiselessly through the deep dust that rose to the very
hubs of the wheels, and the infantry sank ankle-deep in that soft, choking, hot
dust that never cooled even at night. Some of this dust was kneaded by the feet
and wheels, while the rest rose and hung like a cloud over the troops, settling
in eyes, ears, hair, and nostrils, and worst of all in the lungs of the men and
beasts as they moved along that road. The higher the sun rose the higher rose
that cloud of dust, and through the screen of its hot fine particles one could
look with naked eye at the sun, which showed like a huge crimson ball in the
unclouded sky. There was no wind, and the men choked in that motionless
atmosphere. They marched with handkerchiefs tied over their noses and
mouths. When they passed through a village they all rushed to the wells and
fought for the water and drank it down to the mud.
Prince Andrew was in command of a regiment, and the management of that
regiment, the welfare of the men and the necessity of receiving and giving
orders, engrossed him. The burning of Smolensk and its abandonment made
an epoch in his life. A novel feeling of anger against the foe made him forget
his own sorrow. He was entirely devoted to the affairs of his regiment and was
considerate and kind to his men and officers. In the regiment they called him
"our prince," were proud of him and loved him. But he was kind and gentle
only to those of his regiment, to Timokhin and the like—people quite new to
him, belonging to a different world and who could not know and understand
his past. As soon as he came across a former acquaintance or anyone from the
staff, he bristled up immediately and grew spiteful, ironical, and
contemptuous. Everything that reminded him of his past was repugnant to
him, and so in his relations with that former circle he confined himself to
trying to do his duty and not to be unfair.
In truth everything presented itself in a dark and gloomy light to Prince
Andrew, especially after the abandonment of Smolensk on the sixth of August
(he considered that it could and should have been defended) and after his sick
father had had to flee to Moscow, abandoning to pillage his dearly beloved
Bald Hills which he had built and peopled. But despite this, thanks to his
regiment, Prince Andrew had something to think about entirely apart from
general questions. Two days previously he had received news that his father,
son, and sister had left for Moscow; and though there was nothing for him to
do at Bald Hills, Prince Andrew with a characteristic desire to foment his own
grief decided that he must ride there.
He ordered his horse to be saddled and, leaving his regiment on the march,
rode to his father's estate where he had been born and spent his childhood.
Riding past the pond where there used always to be dozens of women
chattering as they rinsed their linen or beat it with wooden beetles, Prince
Andrew noticed that there was not a soul about and that the little washing
wharf, torn from its place and half submerged, was floating on its side in the
middle of the pond. He rode to the keeper's lodge. No one at the stone entrance
gates of the drive and the door stood open. Grass had already begun to grow
on the garden paths, and horses and calves were straying in the English park.
Prince Andrew rode up to the hothouse; some of the glass panes were broken,
and of the trees in tubs some were overturned and others dried up. He called
for Taras the gardener, but no one replied. Having gone round the corner of the
hothouse to the ornamental garden, he saw that the carved garden fence was
broken and branches of the plum trees had been torn off with the fruit. An old
peasant whom Prince Andrew in his childhood had often seen at the gate was
sitting on a green garden seat, plaiting a bast shoe.
He was deaf and did not hear Prince Andrew ride up. He was sitting on the
seat the old prince used to like to sit on, and beside him strips of bast were
hanging on the broken and withered branch of a magnolia.
Prince Andrew rode up to the house. Several limes in the old garden had been
cut down and a piebald mare and her foal were wandering in front of the house
among the rosebushes. The shutters were all closed, except at one window
which was open. A little serf boy, seeing Prince Andrew, ran into the house.
Alpatych, having sent his family away, was alone at Bald Hills and was sitting
indoors reading the Lives of the Saints. On hearing that Prince Andrew had
come, he went out with his spectacles on his nose, buttoning his coat, and,
hastily stepping up, without a word began weeping and kissing Prince
Andrew's knee.
Then, vexed at his own weakness, he turned away and began to report on the
position of affairs. Everything precious and valuable had been removed to
Bogucharovo. Seventy quarters of grain had also been carted away. The hay
and the spring corn, of which Alpatych said there had been a remarkable crop
that year, had been commandeered by the troops and mown down while still
green. The peasants were ruined; some of them too had gone to Bogucharovo,
only a few remained.
Without waiting to hear him out, Prince Andrew asked:
"When did my father and sister leave?" meaning when did they leave for
Moscow.
Alpatych, understanding the question to refer to their departure for
Bogucharovo, replied that they had left on the seventh and again went into
details concerning the estate management, asking for instructions.
"Am I to let the troops have the oats, and to take a receipt for them? We have
still six hundred quarters left," he inquired.
"What am I to say to him?" thought Prince Andrew, looking down on the old
man's bald head shining in the sun and seeing by the expression on his face
that the old man himself understood how untimely such questions were and
only asked them to allay his grief.
"Yes, let them have it," replied Prince Andrew.
"If you noticed some disorder in the garden," said Alpatych, "it was
impossible to prevent it. Three regiments have been here and spent the night,
dragoons mostly. I took down the name and rank of their commanding officer,
to hand in a complaint about it."
"Well, and what are you going to do? Will you stay here if the enemy occupies
the place?" asked Prince Andrew.
Alpatych turned his face to Prince Andrew, looked at him, and suddenly with a
solemn gesture raised his arm.
"He is my refuge! His will be done!" he exclaimed.
A group of bareheaded peasants was approaching across the meadow toward
the prince.
"Well, good-by!" said Prince Andrew, bending over to Alpatych. "You must go
away too, take away what you can and tell the serfs to go to the Ryazan estate
or to the one near Moscow."
Alpatych clung to Prince Andrew's leg and burst into sobs. Gently disengaging
himself, the prince spurred his horse and rode down the avenue at a gallop.
The old man was still sitting in the ornamental garden, like a fly impassive on
the face of a loved one who is dead, tapping the last on which he was making
the bast shoe, and two little girls, running out from the hot house carrying in
their skirts plums they had plucked from the trees there, came upon Prince
Andrew. On seeing the young master, the elder one with frightened look
clutched her younger companion by the hand and hid with her behind a birch
tree, not stopping to pick up some green plums they had dropped.
Prince Andrew turned away with startled haste, unwilling to let them see that
they had been observed. He was sorry for the pretty frightened little girl, was
afraid of looking at her, and yet felt an irresistible desire to do so. A new
sensation of comfort and relief came over him when, seeing these girls, he
realized the existence of other human interests entirely aloof from his own and
just as legitimate as those that occupied him. Evidently these girls passionately
desired one thing—to carry away and eat those green plums without being
caught—and Prince Andrew shared their wish for the success of their
enterprise. He could not resist looking at them once more. Believing their
danger past, they sprang from their ambush and, chirruping something in their
shrill little voices and holding up their skirts, their bare little sunburned feet
scampered merrily and quickly across the meadow grass.
Prince Andrew was somewhat refreshed by having ridden off the dusty
highroad along which the troops were moving. But not far from Bald Hills he
again came out on the road and overtook his regiment at its halting place by
the dam of a small pond. It was past one o'clock. The sun, a red ball through
the dust, burned and scorched his back intolerably through his black coat. The
dust always hung motionless above the buzz of talk that came from the resting
troops. There was no wind. As he crossed the dam Prince Andrew smelled the
ooze and freshness of the pond. He longed to get into that water, however dirty
it might be, and he glanced round at the pool from whence came sounds of
shrieks and laughter. The small, muddy, green pond had risen visibly more
than a foot, flooding the dam, because it was full of the naked white bodies of
soldiers with brick-red hands, necks, and faces, who were splashing about in
it. All this naked white human flesh, laughing and shrieking, floundered about
in that dirty pool like carp stuffed into a watering can, and the suggestion of
merriment in that floundering mass rendered it specially pathetic.
One fair-haired young soldier of the third company, whom Prince Andrew
knew and who had a strap round the calf of one leg, crossed himself, stepped
back to get a good run, and plunged into the water; another, a dark
noncommissioned officer who was always shaggy, stood up to his waist in the
water joyfully wriggling his muscular figure and snorted with satisfaction as
he poured the water over his head with hands blackened to the wrists. There
were sounds of men slapping one another, yelling, and puffing.
Everywhere on the bank, on the dam, and in the pond, there was healthy,
white, muscular flesh. The officer, Timokhin, with his red little nose, standing
on the dam wiping himself with a towel, felt confused at seeing the prince, but
made up his mind to address him nevertheless.
"It's very nice, your excellency! Wouldn't you like to?" said he.
"It's dirty," replied Prince Andrew, making a grimace.
"We'll clear it out for you in a minute," said Timokhin, and, still undressed, ran
off to clear the men out of the pond.
"The prince wants to bathe."
"What prince? Ours?" said many voices, and the men were in such haste to
clear out that the prince could hardly stop them. He decided that he would
rather wash himself with water in the barn.
"Flesh, bodies, cannon fodder!" he thought, and he looked at his own naked
body and shuddered, not from cold but from a sense of disgust and horror he
did not himself understand, aroused by the sight of that immense number of
bodies splashing about in the dirty pond.
On the seventh of August Prince Bagration wrote as follows from his quarters
at Mikhaylovna on the Smolensk road:
Dear Count Alexis Andreevich—(He was writing to Arakcheev but knew that
his letter would be read by the Emperor, and therefore weighed every word in
it to the best of his ability.)
I expect the Minister (Barclay de Tolly) has already reported the abandonment
of Smolensk to the enemy. It is pitiable and sad, and the whole army is in
despair that this most important place has been wantonly abandoned. I, for my
part, begged him personally most urgently and finally wrote him, but nothing
would induce him to consent. I swear to you on my honor that Napoleon was
in such a fix as never before and might have lost half his army but could not
have taken Smolensk. Our troops fought, and are fighting, as never before.
With fifteen thousand men I held the enemy at bay for thirty-five hours and
beat him; but he would not hold out even for fourteen hours. It is disgraceful, a
stain on our army, and as for him, he ought, it seems to me, not to live. If he
reports that our losses were great, it is not true; perhaps about four thousand,
not more, and not even that; but even were they ten thousand, that's war! But
the enemy has lost masses...
What would it have cost him to hold out for another two days? They would
have had to retire of their own accord, for they had no water for men or horses.
He gave me his word he would not retreat, but suddenly sent instructions that
he was retiring that night. We cannot fight in this way, or we may soon bring
the enemy to Moscow...
There is a rumor that you are thinking of peace. God forbid that you should
make peace after all our sacrifices and such insane retreats! You would set all
Russia against you and every one of us would feel ashamed to wear the
uniform. If it has come to this—we must fight as long as Russia can and as
long as there are men able to stand...
One man ought to be in command, and not two. Your Minister may perhaps be
good as a Minister, but as a general he is not merely bad but execrable, yet to
him is entrusted the fate of our whole country.... I am really frantic with
vexation; forgive my writing boldly. It is clear that the man who advocates the
conclusion of a peace, and that the Minister should command the army, does
not love our sovereign and desires the ruin of us all. So I write you frankly:
call out the militia. For the Minister is leading these visitors after him to
Moscow in a most masterly way. The whole army feels great suspicion of the
Imperial aide-de-camp Wolzogen. He is said to be more Napoleon's man than
ours, and he is always advising the Minister. I am not merely civil to him but
obey him like a corporal, though I am his senior. This is painful, but, loving
my benefactor and sovereign, I submit. Only I am sorry for the Emperor that
he entrusts our fine army to such as he. Consider that on our retreat we have
lost by fatigue and left in the hospital more than fifteen thousand men, and had
we attacked this would not have happened. Tell me, for God's sake, what will
Russia, our mother Russia, say to our being so frightened, and why are we
abandoning our good and gallant Fatherland to such rabble and implanting
feelings of hatred and shame in all our subjects? What are we scared at and of
whom are we afraid? I am not to blame that the Minister is vacillating, a
coward, dense, dilatory, and has all bad qualities. The whole army bewails it
and calls down curses upon him...
CHAPTER VI
Among the innumerable categories applicable to the phenomena of human life
one may discriminate between those in which substance prevails and those in
which form prevails. To the latter—as distinguished from village, country,
provincial, or even Moscow life—we may allot Petersburg life, and especially
the life of its salons. That life of the salons is unchanging. Since the year 1805
we had made peace and had again quarreled with Bonaparte and had made
constitutions and unmade them again, but the salons of Anna Pavlovna and
Helene remained just as they had been—the one seven and the other five years
before. At Anna Pavlovna's they talked with perplexity of Bonaparte's
successes just as before and saw in them and in the subservience shown to him
by the European sovereigns a malicious conspiracy, the sole object of which
was to cause unpleasantness and anxiety to the court circle of which Anna
Pavlovna was the representative. And in Helene's salon, which Rumyantsev
himself honored with his visits, regarding Helene as a remarkably intelligent
woman, they talked with the same ecstasy in 1812 as in 1808 of the "great
nation" and the "great man," and regretted our rupture with France, a rupture
which, according to them, ought to be promptly terminated by peace.
Of late, since the Emperor's return from the army, there had been some
excitement in these conflicting salon circles and some demonstrations of
hostility to one another, but each camp retained its own tendency. In Anna
Pavlovna's circle only those Frenchmen were admitted who were deep-rooted
legitimists, and patriotic views were expressed to the effect that one ought not
to go to the French theater and that to maintain the French troupe was costing
the government as much as a whole army corps. The progress of the war was
eagerly followed, and only the reports most flattering to our army were
circulated. In the French circle of Helene and Rumyantsev the reports of the
cruelty of the enemy and of the war were contradicted and all Napoleon's
attempts at conciliation were discussed. In that circle they discountenanced
those who advised hurried preparations for a removal to Kazan of the court
and the girls' educational establishments under the patronage of the Dowager
Empress. In Helene's circle the war in general was regarded as a series of
formal demonstrations which would very soon end in peace, and the view
prevailed expressed by Bilibin—who now in Petersburg was quite at home in
Helene's house, which every clever man was obliged to visit—that not by
gunpowder but by those who invented it would matters be settled. In that
circle the Moscow enthusiasm—news of which had reached Petersburg
simultaneously with the Emperor's return—was ridiculed sarcastically and
very cleverly, though with much caution.
Anna Pavlovna's circle on the contrary was enraptured by this enthusiasm and
spoke of it as Plutarch speaks of the deeds of the ancients. Prince Vasili, who
still occupied his former important posts, formed a connecting link between
these two circles. He visited his "good friend Anna Pavlovna" as well as his
daughter's "diplomatic salon," and often in his constant comings and goings
between the two camps became confused and said at Helene's what he should
have said at Anna Pavlovna's and vice versa.
Soon after the Emperor's return Prince Vasili in a conversation about the war
at Anna Pavlovna's severely condemned Barclay de Tolly, but was undecided
as to who ought to be appointed commander-in-chief. One of the visitors,
usually spoken of as "a man of great merit," having described how he had that
day seen Kutuzov, the newly chosen chief of the Petersburg militia, presiding
over the enrollment of recruits at the Treasury, cautiously ventured to suggest
that Kutuzov would be the man to satisfy all requirements.
Anna Pavlovna remarked with a melancholy smile that Kutuzov had done
nothing but cause the Emperor annoyance.
"I have talked and talked at the Assembly of the Nobility," Prince Vasili
interrupted, "but they did not listen to me. I told them his election as chief of
the militia would not please the Emperor. They did not listen to me.
"It's all this mania for opposition," he went on. "And who for? It is all because
we want to ape the foolish enthusiasm of those Muscovites," Prince Vasili
continued, forgetting for a moment that though at Helene's one had to ridicule
the Moscow enthusiasm, at Anna Pavlovna's one had to be ecstatic about it.
But he retrieved his mistake at once. "Now, is it suitable that Count Kutuzov,
the oldest general in Russia, should preside at that tribunal? He will get
nothing for his pains! How could they make a man commander-in-chief who
cannot mount a horse, who drops asleep at a council, and has the very worst
morals! A good reputation he made for himself at Bucharest! I don't speak of
his capacity as a general, but at a time like this how they appoint a decrepit,
blind old man, positively blind? A fine idea to have a blind general! He can't
see anything. To play blindman's bluff? He can't see at all!"
No one replied to his remarks.
This was quite correct on the twenty-fourth of July. But on the twenty-ninth of
July Kutuzov received the title of Prince. This might indicate a wish to get rid
of him, and therefore Prince Vasili's opinion continued to be correct though he
was not now in any hurry to express it. But on the eighth of August a
committee, consisting of Field Marshal Saltykov, Arakcheev, Vyazmitinov,
Lopukhin, and Kochubey met to consider the progress of the war. This
committee came to the conclusion that our failures were due to a want of unity
in the command and though the members of the committee were aware of the
Emperor's dislike of Kutuzov, after a short deliberation they agreed to advise
his appointment as commander in chief. That same day Kutuzov was
appointed commander-in-chief with full powers over the armies and over the
whole region occupied by them.
On the ninth of August Prince Vasili at Anna Pavlovna's again met the "man of
great merit." The latter was very attentive to Anna Pavlovna because he
wanted to be appointed director of one of the educational establishments for
young ladies. Prince Vasili entered the room with the air of a happy conqueror
who has attained the object of his desires.
"Well, have you heard the great news? Prince Kutuzov is field marshal! All
dissensions are at an end! I am so glad, so delighted! At last we have a man!"
said he, glancing sternly and significantly round at everyone in the drawing
room.
The "man of great merit," despite his desire to obtain the post of director,
could not refrain from reminding Prince Vasili of his former opinion. Though
this was impolite to Prince Vasili in Anna Pavlovna's drawing room, and also
to Anna Pavlovna herself who had received the news with delight, he could
not resist the temptation.
"But, Prince, they say he is blind!" said he, reminding Prince Vasili of his own
words.
"Eh? Nonsense! He sees well enough," said Prince Vasili rapidly, in a deep
voice and with a slight cough—the voice and cough with which he was wont
to dispose of all difficulties.
"He sees well enough," he added. "And what I am so pleased about," he went
on, "is that our sovereign has given him full powers over all the armies and the
whole region—powers no commander-in-chief ever had before. He is a second
autocrat," he concluded with a victorious smile.
"God grant it! God grant it!" said Anna Pavlovna.
The "man of great merit," who was still a novice in court circles, wishing to
flatter Anna Pavlovna by defending her former position on this question,
observed:
"It is said that the Emperor was reluctant to give Kutuzov those powers. They
say he blushed like a girl to whom Joconde is read, when he said to Kutuzov:
'Your Emperor and the Fatherland award you this honor.'"
"Perhaps the heart took no part in that speech," said Anna Pavlovna.
"Oh, no, no!" warmly rejoined Prince Vasili, who would not now yield
Kutuzov to anyone; in his opinion Kutuzov was not only admirable himself,
but was adored by everybody. "No, that's impossible," said he, "for our
sovereign appreciated him so highly before."
"God grant only that Prince Kutuzov assumes real power and does not allow
anyone to put a spoke in his wheel," observed Anna Pavlovna.
Understanding at once to whom she alluded, Prince Vasili said in a whisper:
"I know for a fact that Kutuzov made it an absolute condition that the
Tsarevich should not be with the army. Do you know what he said to the
Emperor?"
And Prince Vasili repeated the words supposed to have been spoken by
Kutuzov to the Emperor. "I can neither punish him if he does wrong nor
reward him if he does right."
"Oh, a very wise man is Prince Kutuzov! I have known him a long time!"
"They even say," remarked the "man of great merit" who did not yet possess
courtly tact, "that his excellency made it an express condition that the
sovereign himself should not be with the army."
As soon as he said this both Prince Vasili and Anna Pavlovna turned away
from him and glanced sadly at one another with a sigh at his naivete.
CHAPTER VII
While this was taking place in Petersburg the French had already passed
Smolensk and were drawing nearer and nearer to Moscow. Napoleon's
historian Thiers, like other of his historians, trying to justify his hero says that
he was drawn to the walls of Moscow against his will. He is as right as other
historians who look for the explanation of historic events in the will of one
man; he is as right as the Russian historians who maintain that Napoleon was
drawn to Moscow by the skill of the Russian commanders. Here besides the
law of retrospection, which regards all the past as a preparation for events that
subsequently occur, the law of reciprocity comes in, confusing the whole
matter. A good chessplayer having lost a game is sincerely convinced that his
loss resulted from a mistake he made and looks for that mistake in the
opening, but forgets that at each stage of the game there were similar mistakes
and that none of his moves were perfect. He only notices the mistake to which
he pays attention, because his opponent took advantage of it. How much more
complex than this is the game of war, which occurs under certain limits of
time, and where it is not one will that manipulates lifeless objects, but
everything results from innumerable conflicts of various wills!
After Smolensk Napoleon sought a battle beyond Dorogobuzh at Vyazma, and
then at Tsarevo-Zaymishche, but it happened that owing to a conjunction of
innumerable circumstances the Russians could not give battle till they reached
Borodino, seventy miles from Moscow. From Vyazma Napoleon ordered a
direct advance on Moscow.
Moscou, la capitale asiatique de ce grand empire, la ville sacree des peuples
d'Alexandre, Moscou avec ses innombrables eglises en forme de pagodes
chinoises, * this Moscow gave Napoleon's imagination no rest. On the march
from Vyazma to Tsarevo-Zaymishche he rode his light bay bobtailed ambler
accompanied by his Guards, his bodyguard, his pages, and aides-de-camp.
Berthier, his chief of staff, dropped behind to question a Russian prisoner
captured by the cavalry. Followed by Lelorgne d'Ideville, an interpreter, he
overtook Napoleon at a gallop and reined in his horse with an amused
expression.
* "Moscow, the Asiatic capital of this great empire, the
sacred city of Alexander's people, Moscow with its
innumerable churches shaped like Chinese pagodas."
"Well?" asked Napoleon.
"One of Platov's Cossacks says that Platov's corps is joining up with the main
army and that Kutuzov has been appointed commander-in-chief. He is a very
shrewd and garrulous fellow."
Napoleon smiled and told them to give the Cossack a horse and bring the man
to him. He wished to talk to him himself. Several adjutants galloped off, and
an hour later, Lavrushka, the serf Denisov had handed over to Rostov, rode up
to Napoleon in an orderly's jacket and on a French cavalry saddle, with a
merry, and tipsy face. Napoleon told him to ride by his side and began
questioning him.
"You are a Cossack?"
"Yes, a Cossack, your Honor."
"The Cossack, not knowing in what company he was, for Napoleon's plain
appearance had nothing about it that would reveal to an Oriental mind the
presence of a monarch, talked with extreme familiarity of the incidents of the
war," says Thiers, narrating this episode. In reality Lavrushka, having got
drunk the day before and left his master dinnerless, had been whipped and sent
to the village in quest of chickens, where he engaged in looting till the French
took him prisoner. Lavrushka was one of those coarse, bare-faced lackeys who
have seen all sorts of things, consider it necessary to do everything in a mean
and cunning way, are ready to render any sort of service to their master, and
are keen at guessing their master's baser impulses, especially those prompted
by vanity and pettiness.
Finding himself in the company of Napoleon, whose identity he had easily and
surely recognized, Lavrushka was not in the least abashed but merely did his
utmost to gain his new master's favor.
He knew very well that this was Napoleon, but Napoleon's presence could no
more intimidate him than Rostov's, or a sergeant major's with the rods, would
have done, for he had nothing that either the sergeant major or Napoleon could
deprive him of.
So he rattled on, telling all the gossip he had heard among the orderlies. Much
of it true. But when Napoleon asked him whether the Russians thought they
would beat Bonaparte or not, Lavrushka screwed up his eyes and considered.
In this question he saw subtle cunning, as men of his type see cunning in
everything, so he frowned and did not answer immediately.
"It's like this," he said thoughtfully, "if there's a battle soon, yours will win.
That's right. But if three days pass, then after that, well, then that same battle
will not soon be over."
Lelorgne d'Ideville smilingly interpreted this speech to Napoleon thus: "If a
battle takes place within the next three days the French will win, but if later,
God knows what will happen." Napoleon did not smile, though he was
evidently in high good humor, and he ordered these words to be repeated.
Lavrushka noticed this and to entertain him further, pretending not to know
who Napoleon was, added:
"We know that you have Bonaparte and that he has beaten everybody in the
world, but we are a different matter..."—without knowing why or how this bit
of boastful patriotism slipped out at the end.
The interpreter translated these words without the last phrase, and Bonaparte
smiled. "The young Cossack made his mighty interlocutor smile," says Thiers.
After riding a few paces in silence, Napoleon turned to Berthier and said he
wished to see how the news that he was talking to the Emperor himself, to that
very Emperor who had written his immortally victorious name on the
Pyramids, would affect this enfant du Don. *
* "Child of the Don."
The fact was accordingly conveyed to Lavrushka.
Lavrushka, understanding that this was done to perplex him and that Napoleon
expected him to be frightened, to gratify his new masters promptly pretended
to be astonished and awe-struck, opened his eyes wide, and assumed the
expression he usually put on when taken to be whipped. "As soon as
Napoleon's interpreter had spoken," says Thiers, "the Cossack, seized by
amazement, did not utter another word, but rode on, his eyes fixed on the
conqueror whose fame had reached him across the steppes of the East. All his
loquacity was suddenly arrested and replaced by a naive and silent feeling of
admiration. Napoleon, after making the Cossack a present, had him set free
like a bird restored to its native fields."
Napoleon rode on, dreaming of the Moscow that so appealed to his
imagination, and "the bird restored to its native fields" galloped to our
outposts, inventing on the way all that had not taken place but that he meant to
relate to his comrades. What had really taken place he did not wish to relate
because it seemed to him not worth telling. He found the Cossacks, inquired
for the regiment operating with Platov's detachment and by evening found his
master, Nicholas Rostov, quartered at Yankovo. Rostov was just mounting to
go for a ride round the neighboring villages with Ilyin; he let Lavrushka have
another horse and took him along with him.
CHAPTER VIII
Princess Mary was not in Moscow and out of danger as Prince Andrew
supposed.
After the return of Alpatych from Smolensk the old prince suddenly seemed to
awake as from a dream. He ordered the militiamen to be called up from the
villages and armed, and wrote a letter to the commander-in-chief informing
him that he had resolved to remain at Bald Hills to the last extremity and to
defend it, leaving to the commander-in-chief's discretion to take measures or
not for the defense of Bald Hills, where one of Russia's oldest generals would
be captured or killed, and he announced to his household that he would remain
at Bald Hills.
But while himself remaining, he gave instructions for the departure of the
princess and Dessalles with the little prince to Bogucharovo and thence to
Moscow. Princess Mary, alarmed by her father's feverish and sleepless activity
after his previous apathy, could not bring herself to leave him alone and for the
first time in her life ventured to disobey him. She refused to go away and her
father's fury broke over her in a terrible storm. He repeated every injustice he
had ever inflicted on her. Trying to convict her, he told her she had worn him
out, had caused his quarrel with his son, had harbored nasty suspicions of him,
making it the object of her life to poison his existence, and he drove her from
his study telling her that if she did not go away it was all the same to him. He
declared that he did not wish to remember her existence and warned her not to
dare to let him see her. The fact that he did not, as she had feared, order her to
be carried away by force but only told her not to let him see her cheered
Princess Mary. She knew it was a proof that in the depth of his soul he was
glad she was remaining at home and had not gone away.
The morning after little Nicholas had left, the old prince donned his full
uniform and prepared to visit the commander-in-chief. His caleche was
already at the door. Princess Mary saw him walk out of the house in his
uniform wearing all his orders and go down the garden to review his armed
peasants and domestic serfs. She sat by the window listening to his voice
which reached her from the garden. Suddenly several men came running up
the avenue with frightened faces.
Princess Mary ran out to the porch, down the flower-bordered path, and into
the avenue. A large crowd of militiamen and domestics were moving toward
her, and in their midst several men were supporting by the armpits and
dragging along a little old man in a uniform and decorations. She ran up to
him and, in the play of the sunlight that fell in small round spots through the
shade of the lime-tree avenue, could not be sure what change there was in his
face. All she could see was that his former stern and determined expression
had altered to one of timidity and submission. On seeing his daughter he
moved his helpless lips and made a hoarse sound. It was impossible to make
out what he wanted. He was lifted up, carried to his study, and laid on the very
couch he had so feared of late.
The doctor, who was fetched that same night, bled him and said that the prince
had had a seizure paralyzing his right side.
It was becoming more and more dangerous to remain at Bald Hills, and next
day they moved the prince to Bogucharovo, the doctor accompanying him.
By the time they reached Bogucharovo, Dessalles and the little prince had
already left for Moscow.
For three weeks the old prince lay stricken by paralysis in the new house
Prince Andrew had built at Bogucharovo, ever in the same state, getting
neither better nor worse. He was unconscious and lay like a distorted corpse.
He muttered unceasingly, his eyebrows and lips twitching, and it was
impossible to tell whether he understood what was going on around him or
not. One thing was certain—that he was suffering and wished to say
something. But what it was, no one could tell: it might be some caprice of a
sick and half-crazy man, or it might relate to public affairs, or possibly to
family concerns.
The doctor said this restlessness did not mean anything and was due to
physical causes; but Princess Mary thought he wished to tell her something,
and the fact that her presence always increased his restlessness confirmed her
opinion.
He was evidently suffering both physically and mentally. There was no hope
of recovery. It was impossible for him to travel, it would not do to let him die
on the road. "Would it not be better if the end did come, the very end?"
Princess Mary sometimes thought. Night and day, hardly sleeping at all, she
watched him and, terrible to say, often watched him not with hope of finding
signs of improvement but wishing to find symptoms of the approach of the
end.
Strange as it was to her to acknowledge this feeling in herself, yet there it was.
And what seemed still more terrible to her was that since her father's illness
began (perhaps even sooner, when she stayed with him expecting something to
happen), all the personal desires and hopes that had been forgotten or sleeping
within her had awakened. Thoughts that had not entered her mind for years—
thoughts of a life free from the fear of her father, and even the possibility of
love and of family happiness—floated continually in her imagination like
temptations of the devil. Thrust them aside as she would, questions continually
recurred to her as to how she would order her life now, after that. These were
temptations of the devil and Princess Mary knew it. She knew that the sole
weapon against him was prayer, and she tried to pray. She assumed an attitude
of prayer, looked at the icons, repeated the words of a prayer, but she could not
pray. She felt that a different world had now taken possession of her—the life
of a world of strenuous and free activity, quite opposed to the spiritual world
in which till now she had been confined and in which her greatest comfort had
been prayer. She could not pray, could not weep, and worldly cares took
possession of her.
It was becoming dangerous to remain in Bogucharovo. News of the approach
of the French came from all sides, and in one village, ten miles from
Bogucharovo, a homestead had been looted by French marauders.
The doctor insisted on the necessity of moving the prince; the provincial
Marshal of the Nobility sent an official to Princess Mary to persuade her to get
away as quickly as possible, and the head of the rural police having come to
Bogucharovo urged the same thing, saying that the French were only some
twenty-five miles away, that French proclamations were circulating in the
villages, and that if the princess did not take her father away before the
fifteenth, he could not answer for the consequences.
The princess decided to leave on the fifteenth. The cares of preparation and
giving orders, for which everyone came to her, occupied her all day. She spent
the night of the fourteenth as usual, without undressing, in the room next to the
one where the prince lay. Several times, waking up, she heard his groans and
muttering, the creak of his bed, and the steps of Tikhon and the doctor when
they turned him over. Several times she listened at the door, and it seemed to
her that his mutterings were louder than usual and that they turned him over
oftener. She could not sleep and several times went to the door and listened,
wishing to enter but not deciding to do so. Though he did not speak, Princess
Mary saw and knew how unpleasant every sign of anxiety on his account was
to him. She had noticed with what dissatisfaction he turned from the look she
sometimes involuntarily fixed on him. She knew that her going in during the
night at an unusual hour would irritate him.
But never had she felt so grieved for him or so much afraid of losing him. She
recalled all her life with him and in every word and act of his found an
expression of his love of her. Occasionally amid these memories temptations
of the devil would surge into her imagination: thoughts of how things would
be after his death, and how her new, liberated life would be ordered. But she
drove these thoughts away with disgust. Toward morning he became quiet and
she fell asleep.
She woke late. That sincerity which often comes with waking showed her
clearly what chiefly concerned her about her father's illness. On waking she
listened to what was going on behind the door and, hearing him groan, said to
herself with a sigh that things were still the same.
"But what could have happened? What did I want? I want his death!" she cried
with a feeling of loathing for herself.
She washed, dressed, said her prayers, and went out to the porch. In front of it
stood carriages without horses and things were being packed into the vehicles.
It was a warm, gray morning. Princess Mary stopped at the porch, still
horrified by her spiritual baseness and trying to arrange her thoughts before
going to her father. The doctor came downstairs and went out to her.
"He is a little better today," said he. "I was looking for you. One can make out
something of what he is saying. His head is clearer. Come in, he is asking for
you..."
Princess Mary's heart beat so violently at this news that she grew pale and
leaned against the wall to keep from falling. To see him, talk to him, feel his
eyes on her now that her whole soul was overflowing with those dreadful,
wicked temptations, was a torment of joy and terror.
"Come," said the doctor.
Princess Mary entered her father's room and went up to his bed. He was lying
on his back propped up high, and his small bony hands with their knotted
purple veins were lying on the quilt; his left eye gazed straight before him, his
right eye was awry, and his brows and lips motionless. He seemed altogether
so thin, small, and pathetic. His face seemed to have shriveled or melted; his
features had grown smaller. Princess Mary went up and kissed his hand. His
left hand pressed hers so that she understood that he had long been waiting for
her to come. He twitched her hand, and his brows and lips quivered angrily.
She looked at him in dismay trying to guess what he wanted of her. When she
changed her position so that his left eye could see her face he calmed down,
not taking his eyes off her for some seconds. Then his lips and tongue moved,
sounds came, and he began to speak, gazing timidly and imploringly at her,
evidently afraid that she might not understand.
Straining all her faculties Princess Mary looked at him. The comic efforts with
which he moved his tongue made her drop her eyes and with difficulty repress
the sobs that rose to her throat. He said something, repeating the same words
several times. She could not understand them, but tried to guess what he was
saying and inquiringly repeated the words he uttered.
"Mmm...ar...ate...ate..." he repeated several times.
It was quite impossible to understand these sounds. The doctor thought he had
guessed them, and inquiringly repeated: "Mary, are you afraid?" The prince
shook his head, again repeated the same sounds.
"My mind, my mind aches?" questioned Princess Mary.
He made a mumbling sound in confirmation of this, took her hand, and began
pressing it to different parts of his breast as if trying to find the right place for
it.
"Always thoughts... about you... thoughts..." he then uttered much more
clearly than he had done before, now that he was sure of being understood.
Princess Mary pressed her head against his hand, trying to hide her sobs and
tears.
He moved his hand over her hair.
"I have been calling you all night..." he brought out.
"If only I had known..." she said through her tears. "I was afraid to come in."
He pressed her hand.
"Weren't you asleep?"
"No, I did not sleep," said Princess Mary, shaking her head.
Unconsciously imitating her father, she now tried to express herself as he did,
as much as possible by signs, and her tongue too seemed to move with
difficulty.
"Dear one... Dearest..." Princess Mary could not quite make out what he had
said, but from his look it was clear that he had uttered a tender caressing word
such as he had never used to her before. "Why didn't you come in?"
"And I was wishing for his death!" thought Princess Mary.
He was silent awhile.
"Thank you... daughter dear!... for all, for all... forgive!... thank you!...
forgive!... thank you!..." and tears began to flow from his eyes. "Call
Andrew!" he said suddenly, and a childish, timid expression of doubt showed
itself on his face as he spoke.
He himself seemed aware that his demand was meaningless. So at least it
seemed to Princess Mary.
"I have a letter from him," she replied.
He glanced at her with timid surprise.
"Where is he?"
"He's with the army, Father, at Smolensk."
He closed his eyes and remained silent a long time. Then as if in answer to his
doubts and to confirm the fact that now he understood and remembered
everything, he nodded his head and reopened his eyes.
"Yes," he said, softly and distinctly. "Russia has perished. They've destroyed
her."
And he began to sob, and again tears flowed from his eyes. Princess Mary
could no longer restrain herself and wept while she gazed at his face.
Again he closed his eyes. His sobs ceased, he pointed to his eyes, and Tikhon,
understanding him, wiped away the tears.
Then he again opened his eyes and said something none of them could
understand for a long time, till at last Tikhon understood and repeated it.
Princess Mary had sought the meaning of his words in the mood in which he
had just been speaking. She thought he was speaking of Russia, or Prince
Andrew, of herself, of his grandson, or of his own death, and so she could not
guess his words.
"Put on your white dress. I like it," was what he said.
Having understood this Princess Mary sobbed still louder, and the doctor
taking her arm led her out to the veranda, soothing her and trying to persuade
her to prepare for her journey. When she had left the room the prince again
began speaking about his son, about the war, and about the Emperor, angrily
twitching his brows and raising his hoarse voice, and then he had a second and
final stroke.
Princess Mary stayed on the veranda. The day had cleared, it was hot and
sunny. She could understand nothing, think of nothing and feel nothing, except
passionate love for her father, love such as she thought she had never felt till
that moment. She ran out sobbing into the garden and as far as the pond, along
the avenues of young lime trees Prince Andrew had planted.
"Yes... I... I... I wished for his death! Yes, I wanted it to end quicker.... I wished
to be at peace.... And what will become of me? What use will peace be when
he is no longer here?" Princess Mary murmured, pacing the garden with
hurried steps and pressing her hands to her bosom which heaved with
convulsive sobs.
When she had completed the tour of the garden, which brought her again to
the house, she saw Mademoiselle Bourienne—who had remained at
Bogucharovo and did not wish to leave it—coming toward her with a stranger.
This was the Marshal of the Nobility of the district, who had come personally
to point out to the princess the necessity for her prompt departure. Princess
Mary listened without understanding him; she led him to the house, offered
him lunch, and sat down with him. Then, excusing herself, she went to the
door of the old prince's room. The doctor came out with an agitated face and
said she could not enter.
"Go away, Princess! Go away... go away!"
She returned to the garden and sat down on the grass at the foot of the slope by
the pond, where no one could see her. She did not know how long she had
been there when she was aroused by the sound of a woman's footsteps running
along the path. She rose and saw Dunyasha her maid, who was evidently
looking for her, and who stopped suddenly as if in alarm on seeing her
mistress.
"Please come, Princess... The Prince," said Dunyasha in a breaking voice.
"Immediately, I'm coming, I'm coming!" replied the princess hurriedly, not
giving Dunyasha time to finish what she was saying, and trying to avoid
seeing the girl she ran toward the house.
"Princess, it's God's will! You must be prepared for everything," said the
Marshal, meeting her at the house door.
"Let me alone; it's not true!" she cried angrily to him.
The doctor tried to stop her. She pushed him aside and ran to her father's door.
"Why are these people with frightened faces stopping me? I don't want any of
them! And what are they doing here?" she thought. She opened the door and
the bright daylight in that previously darkened room startled her. In the room
were her nurse and other women. They all drew back from the bed, making
way for her. He was still lying on the bed as before, but the stern expression of
his quiet face made Princess Mary stop short on the threshold.
"No, he's not dead—it's impossible!" she told herself and approached him, and
repressing the terror that seized her, she pressed her lips to his cheek. But she
stepped back immediately. All the force of the tenderness she had been feeling
for him vanished instantly and was replaced by a feeling of horror at what lay
there before her. "No, he is no more! He is not, but here where he was is
something unfamiliar and hostile, some dreadful, terrifying, and repellent
mystery!" And hiding her face in her hands, Princess Mary sank into the arms
of the doctor, who held her up.
In the presence of Tikhon and the doctor the women washed what had been
the prince, tied his head up with a handkerchief that the mouth should not
stiffen while open, and with another handkerchief tied together the legs that
were already spreading apart. Then they dressed him in uniform with his
decorations and placed his shriveled little body on a table. Heaven only knows
who arranged all this and when, but it all got done as if of its own accord.
Toward night candles were burning round his coffin, a pall was spread over it,
the floor was strewn with sprays of juniper, a printed band was tucked in under
his shriveled head, and in a corner of the room sat a chanter reading the
psalms.
Just as horses shy and snort and gather about a dead horse, so the inmates of
the house and strangers crowded into the drawing room round the coffin—the
Marshal, the village Elder, peasant women—and all with fixed and frightened
eyes, crossing themselves, bowed and kissed the old prince's cold and
stiffened hand.
CHAPTER IX
Until Prince Andrew settled in Bogucharovo its owners had always been
absentees, and its peasants were of quite a different character from those of
Bald Hills. They differed from them in speech, dress, and disposition. They
were called steppe peasants. The old prince used to approve of them for their
endurance at work when they came to Bald Hills to help with the harvest or to
dig ponds, and ditches, but he disliked them for their boorishness.
Prince Andrew's last stay at Bogucharovo, when he introduced hospitals and
schools and reduced the quitrent the peasants had to pay, had not softened their
disposition but had on the contrary strengthened in them the traits of character
the old prince called boorishness. Various obscure rumors were always current
among them: at one time a rumor that they would all be enrolled as Cossacks;
at another of a new religion to which they were all to be converted; then of
some proclamation of the Tsar's and of an oath to the Tsar Paul in 1797 (in
connection with which it was rumored that freedom had been granted them but
the landowners had stopped it), then of Peter Fedorovich's return to the throne
in seven years' time, when everything would be made free and so "simple" that
there would be no restrictions. Rumors of the war with Bonaparte and his
invasion were connected in their minds with the same sort of vague notions of
Antichrist, the end of the world, and "pure freedom."
In the vicinity of Bogucharovo were large villages belonging to the crown or
to owners whose serfs paid quitrent and could work where they pleased. There
were very few resident landlords in the neighborhood and also very few
domestic or literate serfs, and in the lives of the peasantry of those parts the
mysterious undercurrents in the life of the Russian people, the causes and
meaning of which are so baffling to contemporaries, were more clearly and
strongly noticeable than among others. One instance, which had occurred
some twenty years before, was a movement among the peasants to emigrate to
some unknown "warm rivers." Hundreds of peasants, among them the
Bogucharovo folk, suddenly began selling their cattle and moving in whole
families toward the southeast. As birds migrate to somewhere beyond the sea,
so these men with their wives and children streamed to the southeast, to parts
where none of them had ever been. They set off in caravans, bought their
freedom one by one or ran away, and drove or walked toward the "warm
rivers." Many of them were punished, some sent to Siberia, many died of cold
and hunger on the road, many returned of their own accord, and the movement
died down of itself just as it had sprung up, without apparent reason. But such
undercurrents still existed among the people and gathered new forces ready to
manifest themselves just as strangely, unexpectedly, and at the same time
simply, naturally, and forcibly. Now in 1812, to anyone living in close touch
with these people it was apparent that these undercurrents were acting strongly
and nearing an eruption.
Alpatych, who had reached Bogucharovo shortly before the old prince's death,
noticed an agitation among the peasants, and that contrary to what was
happening in the Bald Hills district, where over a radius of forty miles all the
peasants were moving away and leaving their villages to be devastated by the
Cossacks, the peasants in the steppe region round Bogucharovo were, it was
rumored, in touch with the French, received leaflets from them that passed
from hand to hand, and did not migrate. He learned from domestic serfs loyal
to him that the peasant Karp, who possessed great influence in the village
commune and had recently been away driving a government transport, had
returned with news that the Cossacks were destroying deserted villages, but
that the French did not harm them. Alpatych also knew that on the previous
day another peasant had even brought from the village of Visloukhovo, which
was occupied by the French, a proclamation by a French general that no harm
would be done to the inhabitants, and if they remained they would be paid for
anything taken from them. As proof of this the peasant had brought from
Visloukhovo a hundred rubles in notes (he did not know that they were false)
paid to him in advance for hay.
More important still, Alpatych learned that on the morning of the very day he
gave the village Elder orders to collect carts to move the princess' luggage
from Bogucharovo, there had been a village meeting at which it had been
decided not to move but to wait. Yet there was no time to waste. On the
fifteenth, the day of the old prince's death, the Marshal had insisted on
Princess Mary's leaving at once, as it was becoming dangerous. He had told
her that after the sixteenth he could not be responsible for what might happen.
On the evening of the day the old prince died the Marshal went away,
promising to return next day for the funeral. But this he was unable to do, for
he received tidings that the French had unexpectedly advanced, and had barely
time to remove his own family and valuables from his estate.
For some thirty years Bogucharovo had been managed by the village Elder,
Dron, whom the old prince called by the diminutive "Dronushka."
Dron was one of those physically and mentally vigorous peasants who grow
big beards as soon as they are of age and go on unchanged till they are sixty or
seventy, without a gray hair or the loss of a tooth, as straight and strong at
sixty as at thirty.
Soon after the migration to the "warm rivers," in which he had taken part like
the rest, Dron was made village Elder and overseer of Bogucharovo, and had
since filled that post irreproachably for twenty-three years. The peasants
feared him more than they did their master. The masters, both the old prince
and the young, and the steward respected him and jestingly called him "the
Minister." During the whole time of his service Dron had never been drunk or
ill, never after sleepless nights or the hardest tasks had he shown the least
fatigue, and though he could not read he had never forgotten a single money
account or the number of quarters of flour in any of the endless cartloads he
sold for the prince, nor a single shock of the whole corn crop on any single
acre of the Bogucharovo fields.
Alpatych, arriving from the devastated Bald Hills estate, sent for his Dron on
the day of the prince's funeral and told him to have twelve horses got ready for
the princess' carriages and eighteen carts for the things to be removed from
Bogucharovo. Though the peasants paid quitrent, Alpatych thought no
difficulty would be made about complying with this order, for there were two
hundred and thirty households at work in Bogucharovo and the peasants were
well to do. But on hearing the order Dron lowered his eyes and remained
silent. Alpatych named certain peasants he knew, from whom he told him to
take the carts.
Dron replied that the horses of these peasants were away carting. Alpatych
named others, but they too, according to Dron, had no horses available: some
horses were carting for the government, others were too weak, and others had
died for want of fodder. It seemed that no horses could be had even for the
carriages, much less for the carting.
Alpatych looked intently at Dron and frowned. Just as Dron was a model
village Elder, so Alpatych had not managed the prince's estates for twenty
years in vain. He was a model steward, possessing in the highest degree the
faculty of divining the needs and instincts of those he dealt with. Having
glanced at Dron he at once understood that his answers did not express his
personal views but the general mood of the Bogucharovo commune, by which
the Elder had already been carried away. But he also knew that Dron, who had
acquired property and was hated by the commune, must be hesitating between
the two camps: the masters' and the serfs'. He noticed this hesitation in Dron's
look and therefore frowned and moved closer up to him.
"Now just listen, Dronushka," said he. "Don't talk nonsense to me. His
excellency Prince Andrew himself gave me orders to move all the people
away and not leave them with the enemy, and there is an order from the Tsar
about it too. Anyone who stays is a traitor to the Tsar. Do you hear?"
"I hear," Dron answered without lifting his eyes.
Alpatych was not satisfied with this reply.
"Eh, Dron, it will turn out badly!" he said, shaking his head.
"The power is in your hands," Dron rejoined sadly.
"Eh, Dron, drop it!" Alpatych repeated, withdrawing his hand from his bosom
and solemnly pointing to the floor at Dron's feet. "I can see through you and
three yards into the ground under you," he continued, gazing at the floor in
front of Dron.
Dron was disconcerted, glanced furtively at Alpatych and again lowered his
eyes.
"You drop this nonsense and tell the people to get ready to leave their homes
and go to Moscow and to get carts ready for tomorrow morning for the
princess' things. And don't go to any meeting yourself, do you hear?"
Dron suddenly fell on his knees.
"Yakov Alpatych, discharge me! Take the keys from me and discharge me, for
Christ's sake!"
"Stop that!" cried Alpatych sternly. "I see through you and three yards under
you," he repeated, knowing that his skill in beekeeping, his knowledge of the
right time to sow the oats, and the fact that he had been able to retain the old
prince's favor for twenty years had long since gained him the reputation of
being a wizard, and that the power of seeing three yards under a man is
considered an attribute of wizards.
Dron got up and was about to say something, but Alpatych interrupted him.
"What is it you have got into your heads, eh?... What are you thinking of, eh?"
"What am I to do with the people?" said Dron. "They're quite beside
themselves; I have already told them..."
"'Told them,' I dare say!" said Alpatych. "Are they drinking?" he asked
abruptly.
"Quite beside themselves, Yakov Alpatych; they've fetched another barrel."
"Well, then, listen! I'll go to the police officer, and you tell them so, and that
they must stop this and the carts must be got ready."
"I understand."
Alpatych did not insist further. He had managed people for a long time and
knew that the chief way to make them obey is to show no suspicion that they
can possibly disobey. Having wrung a submissive "I understand" from Dron,
Alpatych contented himself with that, though he not only doubted but felt
almost certain that without the help of troops the carts would not be
forthcoming.
And so it was, for when evening came no carts had been provided. In the
village, outside the drink shop, another meeting was being held, which decided
that the horses should be driven out into the woods and the carts should not be
provided. Without saying anything of this to the princess, Alpatych had his
own belongings taken out of the carts which had arrived from Bald Hills and
had those horses got ready for the princess' carriages. Meanwhile he went
himself to the police authorities.
CHAPTER X
After her father's funeral Princess Mary shut herself up in her room and did
not admit anyone. A maid came to the door to say that Alpatych was asking
for orders about their departure. (This was before his talk with Dron.) Princess
Mary raised herself on the sofa on which she had been lying and replied
through the closed door that she did not mean to go away and begged to be left
in peace.
The windows of the room in which she was lying looked westward. She lay on
the sofa with her face to the wall, fingering the buttons of the leather cushion
and seeing nothing but that cushion, and her confused thoughts were centered
on one subject—the irrevocability of death and her own spiritual baseness,
which she had not suspected, but which had shown itself during her father's
illness. She wished to pray but did not dare to, dared not in her present state of
mind address herself to God. She lay for a long time in that position.
The sun had reached the other side of the house, and its slanting rays shone
into the open window, lighting up the room and part of the morocco cushion at
which Princess Mary was looking. The flow of her thoughts suddenly stopped.
Unconsciously she sat up, smoothed her hair, got up, and went to the window,
involuntarily inhaling the freshness of the clear but windy evening.
"Yes, you can well enjoy the evening now! He is gone and no one will hinder
you," she said to herself, and sinking into a chair she let her head fall on the
window sill.
Someone spoke her name in a soft and tender voice from the garden and
kissed her head. She looked up. It was Mademoiselle Bourienne in a black
dress and weepers. She softly approached Princess Mary, sighed, kissed her,
and immediately began to cry. The princess looked up at her. All their former
disharmony and her own jealousy recurred to her mind. But she remembered
too how he had changed of late toward Mademoiselle Bourienne and could not
bear to see her, thereby showing how unjust were the reproaches Princess
Mary had mentally addressed to her. "Besides, is it for me, for me who desired
his death, to condemn anyone?" she thought.
Princess Mary vividly pictured to herself the position of Mademoiselle
Bourienne, whom she had of late kept at a distance, but who yet was
dependent on her and living in her house. She felt sorry for her and held out
her hand with a glance of gentle inquiry. Mademoiselle Bourienne at once
began crying again and kissed that hand, speaking of the princess' sorrow and
making herself a partner in it. She said her only consolation was the fact that
the princess allowed her to share her sorrow, that all the old misunderstandings
should sink into nothing but this great grief; that she felt herself blameless in
regard to everyone, and that he, from above, saw her affection and gratitude.
The princess heard her, not heeding her words but occasionally looking up at
her and listening to the sound of her voice.
"Your position is doubly terrible, dear princess," said Mademoiselle Bourienne
after a pause. "I understand that you could not, and cannot, think of yourself,
but with my love for you I must do so.... Has Alpatych been to you? Has he
spoken to you of going away?" she asked.
Princess Mary did not answer. She did not understand who was to go or where
to. "Is it possible to plan or think of anything now? Is it not all the same?" she
thought, and did not reply.
"You know, chere Marie," said Mademoiselle Bourienne, "that we are in
danger—are surrounded by the French. It would be dangerous to move now. If
we go we are almost sure to be taken prisoners, and God knows..."
Princess Mary looked at her companion without understanding what she was
talking about.
"Oh, if anyone knew how little anything matters to me now," she said. "Of
course I would on no account wish to go away from him.... Alpatych did say
something about going.... Speak to him; I can do nothing, nothing, and don't
want to...."
"I've spoken to him. He hopes we should be in time to get away tomorrow, but
I think it would now be better to stay here," said Mademoiselle Bourienne.
"Because, you will agree, chere Marie, to fall into the hands of the soldiers or
of riotous peasants would be terrible."
Mademoiselle Bourienne took from her reticule a proclamation (not printed on
ordinary Russian paper) of General Rameau's, telling people not to leave their
homes and that the French authorities would afford them proper protection.
She handed this to the princess.
"I think it would be best to appeal to that general," she continued, "and I am
sure that all due respect would be shown you."
Princess Mary read the paper, and her face began to quiver with stifled sobs.
"From whom did you get this?" she asked.
"They probably recognized that I am French, by my name," replied
Mademoiselle Bourienne blushing.
Princess Mary, with the paper in her hand, rose from the window and with a
pale face went out of the room and into what had been Prince Andrew's study.
"Dunyasha, send Alpatych, or Dronushka, or somebody to me!" she said, "and
tell Mademoiselle Bourienne not to come to me," she added, hearing
Mademoiselle Bourienne's voice. "We must go at once, at once!" she said,
appalled at the thought of being left in the hands of the French.
"If Prince Andrew heard that I was in the power of the French! That I, the
daughter of Prince Nicholas Bolkonski, asked General Rameau for protection
and accepted his favor!" This idea horrified her, made her shudder, blush, and
feel such a rush of anger and pride as she had never experienced before. All
that was distressing, and especially all that was humiliating, in her position
rose vividly to her mind. "They, the French, would settle in this house: M. le
General Rameau would occupy Prince Andrew's study and amuse himself by
looking through and reading his letters and papers. Mademoiselle Bourienne
would do the honors of Bogucharovo for him. I should be given a small room
as a favor, the soldiers would violate my father's newly dug grave to steal his
crosses and stars, they would tell me of their victories over the Russians, and
would pretend to sympathize with my sorrow..." thought Princess Mary, not
thinking her own thoughts but feeling bound to think like her father and her
brother. For herself she did not care where she remained or what happened to
her, but she felt herself the representative of her dead father and of Prince
Andrew. Involuntarily she thought their thoughts and felt their feelings. What
they would have said and what they would have done she felt bound to say
and do. She went into Prince Andrew's study, trying to enter completely into
his ideas, and considered her position.
The demands of life, which had seemed to her annihilated by her father's
death, all at once rose before her with a new, previously unknown force and
took possession of her.
Agitated and flushed she paced the room, sending now for Michael Ivanovich
and now for Tikhon or Dron. Dunyasha, the nurse, and the other maids could
not say in how far Mademoiselle Bourienne's statement was correct. Alpatych
was not at home, he had gone to the police. Neither could the architect
Michael Ivanovich, who on being sent for came in with sleepy eyes, tell
Princess Mary anything. With just the same smile of agreement with which for
fifteen years he had been accustomed to answer the old prince without
expressing views of his own, he now replied to Princess Mary, so that nothing
definite could be got from his answers. The old valet Tikhon, with sunken,
emaciated face that bore the stamp of inconsolable grief, replied: "Yes,
Princess" to all Princess Mary's questions and hardly refrained from sobbing
as he looked at her.
At length Dron, the village Elder, entered the room and with a deep bow to
Princess Mary came to a halt by the doorpost.
Princess Mary walked up and down the room and stopped in front of him.
"Dronushka," she said, regarding as a sure friend this Dronushka who always
used to bring a special kind of gingerbread from his visit to the fair at Vyazma
every year and smilingly offer it to her, "Dronushka, now since our
misfortune..." she began, but could not go on.
"We are all in God's hands," said he, with a sigh.
They were silent for a while.
"Dronushka, Alpatych has gone off somewhere and I have no one to turn to. Is
it true, as they tell me, that I can't even go away?"
"Why shouldn't you go away, your excellency? You can go," said Dron.
"I was told it would be dangerous because of the enemy. Dear friend, I can do
nothing. I understand nothing. I have nobody! I want to go away tonight or
early tomorrow morning."
Dron paused. He looked askance at Princess Mary and said: "There are no
horses; I told Yakov Alpatych so."
"Why are there none?" asked the princess.
"It's all God's scourge," said Dron. "What horses we had have been taken for
the army or have died—this is such a year! It's not a case of feeding horses—
we may die of hunger ourselves! As it is, some go three days without eating.
We've nothing, we've been ruined."
Princess Mary listened attentively to what he told her.
"The peasants are ruined? They have no bread?" she asked.
"They're dying of hunger," said Dron. "It's not a case of carting."
"But why didn't you tell me, Dronushka? Isn't it possible to help them? I'll do
all I can...."
To Princess Mary it was strange that now, at a moment when such sorrow was
filling her soul, there could be rich people and poor, and the rich could refrain
from helping the poor. She had heard vaguely that there was such a thing as
"landlord's corn" which was sometimes given to the peasants. She also knew
that neither her father nor her brother would refuse to help the peasants in
need, she only feared to make some mistake in speaking about the distribution
of the grain she wished to give. She was glad such cares presented themselves,
enabling her without scruple to forget her own grief. She began asking Dron
about the peasants' needs and what there was in Bogucharovo that belonged to
the landlord.
"But we have grain belonging to my brother?" she said.
"The landlord's grain is all safe," replied Dron proudly. "Our prince did not
order it to be sold."
"Give it to the peasants, let them have all they need; I give you leave in my
brother's name," said she.
Dron made no answer but sighed deeply.
"Give them that corn if there is enough of it. Distribute it all. I give this order
in my brother's name; and tell them that what is ours is theirs. We do not
grudge them anything. Tell them so."
Dron looked intently at the princess while she was speaking.
"Discharge me, little mother, for God's sake! Order the keys to be taken from
me," said he. "I have served twenty-three years and have done no wrong.
Discharge me, for God's sake!"
Princess Mary did not understand what he wanted of her or why he was asking
to be discharged. She replied that she had never doubted his devotion and that
she was ready to do anything for him and for the peasants.
CHAPTER XI
An hour later Dunyasha came to tell the princess that Dron had come, and all
the peasants had assembled at the barn by the princess' order and wished to
have word with their mistress.
"But I never told them to come," said Princess Mary. "I only told Dron to let
them have the grain."
"Only, for God's sake, Princess dear, have them sent away and don't go out to
them. It's all a trick," said Dunyasha, "and when Yakov Alpatych returns let us
get away... and please don't..."
"What is a trick?" asked Princess Mary in surprise.
"I know it is, only listen to me for God's sake! Ask nurse too. They say they
don't agree to leave Bogucharovo as you ordered."
"You're making some mistake. I never ordered them to go away," said Princess
Mary. "Call Dronushka."
Dron came and confirmed Dunyasha's words; the peasants had come by the
princess' order.
"But I never sent for them," declared the princess. "You must have given my
message wrong. I only said that you were to give them the grain."
Dron only sighed in reply.
"If you order it they will go away," said he.
"No, no. I'll go out to them," said Princess Mary, and in spite of the nurse's and
Dunyasha's protests she went out into the porch; Dron, Dunyasha, the nurse,
and Michael Ivanovich following her.
"They probably think I am offering them the grain to bribe them to remain
here, while I myself go away leaving them to the mercy of the French,"
thought Princess Mary. "I will offer them monthly rations and housing at our
Moscow estate. I am sure Andrew would do even more in my place," she
thought as she went out in the twilight toward the crowd standing on the
pasture by the barn.
The men crowded closer together, stirred, and rapidly took off their hats.
Princess Mary lowered her eyes and, tripping over her skirt, came close up to
them. So many different eyes, old and young, were fixed on her, and there
were so many different faces, that she could not distinguish any of them and,
feeling that she must speak to them all at once, did not know how to do it. But
again the sense that she represented her father and her brother gave her
courage, and she boldly began her speech.
"I am very glad you have come," she said without raising her eyes, and feeling
her heart beating quickly and violently. "Dronushka tells me that the war has
ruined you. That is our common misfortune, and I shall grudge nothing to help
you. I am myself going away because it is dangerous here... the enemy is
near... because... I am giving you everything, my friends, and I beg you to take
everything, all our grain, so that you may not suffer want! And if you have
been told that I am giving you the grain to keep you here—that is not true. On
the contrary, I ask you to go with all your belongings to our estate near
Moscow, and I promise you I will see to it that there you shall want for
nothing. You shall be given food and lodging."
The princess stopped. Sighs were the only sound heard in the crowd.
"I am not doing this on my own account," she continued, "I do it in the name
of my dead father, who was a good master to you, and of my brother and his
son."
Again she paused. No one broke the silence.
"Ours is a common misfortune and we will share it together. All that is mine is
yours," she concluded, scanning the faces before her.
All eyes were gazing at her with one and the same expression. She could not
fathom whether it was curiosity, devotion, gratitude, or apprehension and
distrust—but the expression on all the faces was identical.
"We are all very thankful for your bounty, but it won't do for us to take the
landlord's grain," said a voice at the back of the crowd.
"But why not?" asked the princess.
No one replied and Princess Mary, looking round at the crowd, found that
every eye she met now was immediately dropped.
"But why don't you want to take it?" she asked again.
No one answered.
The silence began to oppress the princess and she tried to catch someone's eye.
"Why don't you speak?" she inquired of a very old man who stood just in front
of her leaning on his stick. "If you think something more is wanted, tell me! I
will do anything," said she, catching his eye.
But as if this angered him, he bent his head quite low and muttered:
"Why should we agree? We don't want the grain."
"Why should we give up everything? We don't agree. Don't agree.... We are
sorry for you, but we're not willing. Go away yourself, alone..." came from
various sides of the crowd.
And again all the faces in that crowd bore an identical expression, though now
it was certainly not an expression of curiosity or gratitude, but of angry
resolve.
"But you can't have understood me," said Princess Mary with a sad smile.
"Why don't you want to go? I promise to house and feed you, while here the
enemy would ruin you..."
But her voice was drowned by the voices of the crowd.
"We're not willing. Let them ruin us! We won't take your grain. We don't
agree."
Again Princess Mary tried to catch someone's eye, but not a single eye in the
crowd was turned to her; evidently they were all trying to avoid her look. She
felt strange and awkward.
"Oh yes, an artful tale! Follow her into slavery! Pull down your houses and go
into bondage! I dare say! 'I'll give you grain, indeed!' she says," voices in the
crowd were heard saying.
With drooping head Princess Mary left the crowd and went back to the house.
Having repeated her order to Dron to have horses ready for her departure next
morning, she went to her room and remained alone with her own thoughts.
CHAPTER XII
For a long time that night Princess Mary sat by the open window of her room
hearing the sound of the peasants' voices that reached her from the village, but
it was not of them she was thinking. She felt that she could not understand
them however much she might think about them. She thought only of one
thing, her sorrow, which, after the break caused by cares for the present,
seemed already to belong to the past. Now she could remember it and weep or
pray.
After sunset the wind had dropped. The night was calm and fresh. Toward
midnight the voices began to subside, a cock crowed, the full moon began to
show from behind the lime trees, a fresh white dewy mist began to rise, and
stillness reigned over the village and the house.
Pictures of the near past—her father's illness and last moments—rose one after
another to her memory. With mournful pleasure she now lingered over these
images, repelling with horror only the last one, the picture of his death, which
she felt she could not contemplate even in imagination at this still and mystic
hour of night. And these pictures presented themselves to her so clearly and in
such detail that they seemed now present, now past, and now future.
She vividly recalled the moment when he had his first stroke and was being
dragged along by his armpits through the garden at Bald Hills, muttering
something with his helpless tongue, twitching his gray eyebrows and looking
uneasily and timidly at her.
"Even then he wanted to tell me what he told me the day he died," she thought.
"He had always thought what he said then." And she recalled in all its detail
the night at Bald Hills before he had the last stroke, when with a foreboding of
disaster she had remained at home against his will. She had not slept and had
stolen downstairs on tiptoe, and going to the door of the conservatory where
he slept that night had listened at the door. In a suffering and weary voice he
was saying something to Tikhon, speaking of the Crimea and its warm nights
and of the Empress. Evidently he had wanted to talk. "And why didn't he call
me? Why didn't he let me be there instead of Tikhon?" Princess Mary had
thought and thought again now. "Now he will never tell anyone what he had in
his soul. Never will that moment return for him or for me when he might have
said all he longed to say, and not Tikhon but I might have heard and
understood him. Why didn't I enter the room?" she thought. "Perhaps he would
then have said to me what he said the day he died. While talking to Tikhon he
asked about me twice. He wanted to see me, and I was standing close by,
outside the door. It was sad and painful for him to talk to Tikhon who did not
understand him. I remember how he began speaking to him about Lise as if
she were alive—he had forgotten she was dead—and Tikhon reminded him
that she was no more, and he shouted, 'Fool!' He was greatly depressed. From
behind the door I heard how he lay down on his bed groaning and loudly
exclaimed, 'My God!' Why didn't I go in then? What could he have done to
me? What could I have lost? And perhaps he would then have been comforted
and would have said that word to me." And Princess Mary uttered aloud the
caressing word he had said to her on the day of his death. "Dear-est!" she
repeated, and began sobbing, with tears that relieved her soul. She now saw
his face before her. And not the face she had known ever since she could
remember and had always seen at a distance, but the timid, feeble face she had
seen for the first time quite closely, with all its wrinkles and details, when she
stooped near to his mouth to catch what he said.
"Dear-est!" she repeated again.
"What was he thinking when he uttered that word? What is he thinking now?"
This question suddenly presented itself to her, and in answer she saw him
before her with the expression that was on his face as he lay in his coffin with
his chin bound up with a white handkerchief. And the horror that had seized
her when she touched him and convinced herself that that was not he, but
something mysterious and horrible, seized her again. She tried to think of
something else and to pray, but could do neither. With wide-open eyes she
gazed at the moonlight and the shadows, expecting every moment to see his
dead face, and she felt that the silence brooding over the house and within it
held her fast.
"Dunyasha," she whispered. "Dunyasha!" she screamed wildly, and tearing
herself out of this silence she ran to the servants' quarters to meet her old nurse
and the maidservants who came running toward her.
CHAPTER XIII
On the seventeenth of August Rostov and Ilyin, accompanied by Lavrushka
who had just returned from captivity and by an hussar orderly, left their
quarters at Yankovo, ten miles from Bogucharovo, and went for a ride—to try
a new horse Ilyin had bought and to find out whether there was any hay to be
had in the villages.
For the last three days Bogucharovo had lain between the two hostile armies,
so that it was as easy for the Russian rearguard to get to it as for the French
vanguard; Rostov, as a careful squadron commander, wished to take such
provisions as remained at Bogucharovo before the French could get them.
Rostov and Ilyin were in the merriest of moods. On the way to Bogucharovo, a
princely estate with a dwelling house and farm where they hoped to find many
domestic serfs and pretty girls, they questioned Lavrushka about Napoleon
and laughed at his stories, and raced one another to try Ilyin's horse.
Rostov had no idea that the village he was entering was the property of that
very Bolkonski who had been engaged to his sister.
Rostov and Ilyin gave rein to their horses for a last race along the incline
before reaching Bogucharovo, and Rostov, outstripping Ilyin, was the first to
gallop into the village street.
"You're first!" cried Ilyin, flushed.
"Yes, always first both on the grassland and here," answered Rostov, stroking
his heated Donets horse.
"And I'd have won on my Frenchy, your excellency," said Lavrushka from
behind, alluding to his shabby cart horse, "only I didn't wish to mortify you."
They rode at a footpace to the barn, where a large crowd of peasants was
standing.
Some of the men bared their heads, others stared at the new arrivals without
doffing their caps. Two tall old peasants with wrinkled faces and scanty beards
emerged from the tavern, smiling, staggering, and singing some incoherent
song, and approached the officers.
"Fine fellows!" said Rostov laughing. "Is there any hay here?"
"And how like one another," said Ilyin.
"A mo-o-st me-r-r-y co-o-m-pa...!" sang one of the peasants with a blissful
smile.
One of the men came out of the crowd and went up to Rostov.
"Who do you belong to?" he asked.
"The French," replied Ilyin jestingly, "and here is Napoleon himself"—and he
pointed to Lavrushka.
"Then you are Russians?" the peasant asked again.
"And is there a large force of you here?" said another, a short man, coming up.
"Very large," answered Rostov. "But why have you collected here?" he added.
"Is it a holiday?"
"The old men have met to talk over the business of the commune," replied the
peasant, moving away.
At that moment, on the road leading from the big house, two women and a
man in a white hat were seen coming toward the officers.
"The one in pink is mine, so keep off!" said Ilyin on seeing Dunyasha running
resolutely toward him.
"She'll be ours!" said Lavrushka to Ilyin, winking.
"What do you want, my pretty?" said Ilyin with a smile.
"The princess ordered me to ask your regiment and your name."
"This is Count Rostov, squadron commander, and I am your humble servant."
"Co-o-om-pa-ny!" roared the tipsy peasant with a beatific smile as he looked
at Ilyin talking to the girl. Following Dunyasha, Alpatych advanced to Rostov,
having bared his head while still at a distance.
"May I make bold to trouble your honor?" said he respectfully, but with a
shade of contempt for the youthfulness of this officer and with a hand thrust
into his bosom. "My mistress, daughter of General in Chief Prince Nicholas
Bolkonski who died on the fifteenth of this month, finding herself in
difficulties owing to the boorishness of these people"—he pointed to the
peasants—"asks you to come up to the house.... Won't you, please, ride on a
little farther," said Alpatych with a melancholy smile, "as it is not convenient
in the presence of...?" He pointed to the two peasants who kept as close to him
as horseflies to a horse.
"Ah!... Alpatych... Ah, Yakov Alpatych... Grand! Forgive us for Christ's sake,
eh?" said the peasants, smiling joyfully at him.
Rostov looked at the tipsy peasants and smiled.
"Or perhaps they amuse your honor?" remarked Alpatych with a staid air, as
he pointed at the old men with his free hand.
"No, there's not much to be amused at here," said Rostov, and rode on a little
way. "What's the matter?" he asked.
"I make bold to inform your honor that the rude peasants here don't wish to let
the mistress leave the estate, and threaten to unharness her horses, so that
though everything has been packed up since morning, her excellency cannot
get away."
"Impossible!" exclaimed Rostov.
"I have the honor to report to you the actual truth," said Alpatych.
Rostov dismounted, gave his horse to the orderly, and followed Alpatych to
the house, questioning him as to the state of affairs. It appeared that the
princess' offer of corn to the peasants the previous day, and her talk with Dron
and at the meeting, had actually had so bad an effect that Dron had finally
given up the keys and joined the peasants and had not appeared when
Alpatych sent for him; and that in the morning when the princess gave orders
to harness for her journey, the peasants had come in a large crowd to the barn
and sent word that they would not let her leave the village: that there was an
order not to move, and that they would unharness the horses. Alpatych had
gone out to admonish them, but was told (it was chiefly Karp who did the
talking, Dron not showing himself in the crowd) that they could not let the
princess go, that there was an order to the contrary, but that if she stayed they
would serve her as before and obey her in everything.
At the moment when Rostov and Ilyin were galloping along the road, Princess
Mary, despite the dissuasions of Alpatych, her nurse, and the maids, had given
orders to harness and intended to start, but when the cavalrymen were espied
they were taken for Frenchmen, the coachman ran away, and the women in the
house began to wail.
"Father! Benefactor! God has sent you!" exclaimed deeply moved voices as
Rostov passed through the anteroom.
Princess Mary was sitting helpless and bewildered in the large sitting room,
when Rostov was shown in. She could not grasp who he was and why he had
come, or what was happening to her. When she saw his Russian face, and by
his walk and the first words he uttered recognized him as a man of her own
class, she glanced at him with her deep radiant look and began speaking in a
voice that faltered and trembled with emotion. This meeting immediately
struck Rostov as a romantic event. "A helpless girl overwhelmed with grief,
left to the mercy of coarse, rioting peasants! And what a strange fate sent me
here! What gentleness and nobility there are in her features and expression!"
thought he as he looked at her and listened to her timid story.
When she began to tell him that all this had happened the day after her father's
funeral, her voice trembled. She turned away, and then, as if fearing he might
take her words as meant to move him to pity, looked at him with an
apprehensive glance of inquiry. There were tears in Rostov's eyes. Princess
Mary noticed this and glanced gratefully at him with that radiant look which
caused the plainness of her face to be forgotten.
"I cannot express, Princess, how glad I am that I happened to ride here and am
able to show my readiness to serve you," said Rostov, rising. "Go when you
please, and I give you my word of honor that no one shall dare to cause you
annoyance if only you will allow me to act as your escort." And bowing
respectfully, as if to a lady of royal blood, he moved toward the door.
Rostov's deferential tone seemed to indicate that though he would consider
himself happy to be acquainted with her, he did not wish to take advantage of
her misfortunes to intrude upon her.
Princess Mary understood this and appreciated his delicacy.
"I am very, very grateful to you," she said in French, "but I hope it was all a
misunderstanding and that no one is to blame for it." She suddenly began to
cry.
"Excuse me!" she said.
Rostov, knitting his brows, left the room with another low bow.
CHAPTER XIV
"Well, is she pretty? Ah, friend—my pink one is delicious; her name is
Dunyasha...."
But on glancing at Rostov's face Ilyin stopped short. He saw that his hero and
commander was following quite a different train of thought.
Rostov glanced angrily at Ilyin and without replying strode off with rapid
steps to the village.
"I'll show them; I'll give it to them, the brigands!" said he to himself.
Alpatych at a gliding trot, only just managing not to run, kept up with him
with difficulty.
"What decision have you been pleased to come to?" said he.
Rostov stopped and, clenching his fists, suddenly and sternly turned on
Alpatych.
"Decision? What decision? Old dotard!..." cried he. "What have you been
about? Eh? The peasants are rioting, and you can't manage them? You're a
traitor yourself! I know you. I'll flay you all alive!..." And as if afraid of
wasting his store of anger, he left Alpatych and went rapidly forward.
Alpatych, mastering his offended feelings, kept pace with Rostov at a gliding
gait and continued to impart his views. He said the peasants were obdurate and
that at the present moment it would be imprudent to "overresist" them without
an armed force, and would it not be better first to send for the military?
"I'll give them armed force... I'll 'overresist' them!" uttered Rostov
meaninglessly, breathless with irrational animal fury and the need to vent it.
Without considering what he would do he moved unconciously with quick,
resolute steps toward the crowd. And the nearer he drew to it the more
Alpatych felt that this unreasonable action might produce good results. The
peasants in the crowd were similarly impressed when they saw Rostov's rapid,
firm steps and resolute, frowning face.
After the hussars had come to the village and Rostov had gone to see the
princess, a certain confusion and dissension had arisen among the crowd.
Some of the peasants said that these new arrivals were Russians and might
take it amiss that the mistress was being detained. Dron was of this opinion,
but as soon as he expressed it Karp and others attacked their ex-Elder.
"How many years have you been fattening on the commune?" Karp shouted at
him. "It's all one to you! You'll dig up your pot of money and take it away with
you.... What does it matter to you whether our homes are ruined or not?"
"We've been told to keep order, and that no one is to leave their homes or take
away a single grain, and that's all about it!" cried another.
"It was your son's turn to be conscripted, but no fear! You begrudged your
lump of a son," a little old man suddenly began attacking Dron—"and so they
took my Vanka to be shaved for a soldier! But we all have to die."
"To be sure, we all have to die. I'm not against the commune," said Dron.
"That's it—not against it! You've filled your belly...."
The two tall peasants had their say. As soon as Rostov, followed by Ilyin,
Lavrushka, and Alpatych, came up to the crowd, Karp, thrusting his fingers
into his belt and smiling a little, walked to the front. Dron on the contrary
retired to the rear and the crowd drew closer together.
"Who is your Elder here? Hey?" shouted Rostov, coming up to the crowd with
quick steps.
"The Elder? What do you want with him?..." asked Karp.
But before the words were well out of his mouth, his cap flew off and a fierce
blow jerked his head to one side.
"Caps off, traitors!" shouted Rostov in a wrathful voice. "Where's the Elder?"
he cried furiously.
"The Elder.... He wants the Elder!... Dron Zakharych, you!" meek and
flustered voices here and there were heard calling and caps began to come off
their heads.
"We don't riot, we're following the orders," declared Karp, and at that moment
several voices began speaking together.
"It's as the old men have decided—there's too many of you giving orders."
"Arguing? Mutiny!... Brigands! Traitors!" cried Rostov unmeaningly in a
voice not his own, gripping Karp by the collar. "Bind him, bind him!" he
shouted, though there was no one to bind him but Lavrushka and Alpatych.
Lavrushka, however, ran up to Karp and seized him by the arms from behind.
"Shall I call up our men from beyond the hill?" he called out.
Alpatych turned to the peasants and ordered two of them by name to come and
bind Karp. The men obediently came out of the crowd and began taking off
their belts.
"Where's the Elder?" demanded Rostov in a loud voice.
With a pale and frowning face Dron stepped out of the crowd.
"Are you the Elder? Bind him, Lavrushka!" shouted Rostov, as if that order,
too, could not possibly meet with any opposition.
And in fact two more peasants began binding Dron, who took off his own belt
and handed it to them, as if to aid them.
"And you all listen to me!" said Rostov to the peasants. "Be off to your houses
at once, and don't let one of your voices be heard!"
"Why, we've not done any harm! We did it just out of foolishness. It's all
nonsense... I said then that it was not in order," voices were heard bickering
with one another.
"There! What did I say?" said Alpatych, coming into his own again. "It's
wrong, lads!"
"All our stupidity, Yakov Alpatych," came the answers, and the
crowd began at once to disperse through the village.
The two bound men were led off to the master's house. The two drunken
peasants followed them.
"Aye, when I look at you!..." said one of them to Karp.
"How can one talk to the masters like that? What were you thinking of, you
fool?" added the other—"A real fool!"
Two hours later the carts were standing in the courtyard of the Bogucharovo
house. The peasants were briskly carrying out the proprietor's goods and
packing them on the carts, and Dron, liberated at Princess Mary's wish from
the cupboard where he had been confined, was standing in the yard directing
the men.
"Don't put it in so carelessly," said one of the peasants, a man with a round
smiling face, taking a casket from a housemaid. "You know it has cost money!
How can you chuck it in like that or shove it under the cord where it'll get
rubbed? I don't like that way of doing things. Let it all be done properly,
according to rule. Look here, put it under the bast matting and cover it with
hay—that's the way!"
"Eh, books, books!" said another peasant, bringing out Prince Andrew's library
cupboards. "Don't catch up against it! It's heavy, lads—solid books."
"Yes, they worked all day and didn't play!" remarked the tall, round-faced
peasant gravely, pointing with a significant wink at the dictionaries that were
on the top.
Unwilling to obtrude himself on the princess, Rostov did not go back to the
house but remained in the village awaiting her departure. When her carriage
drove out of the house, he mounted and accompanied her eight miles from
Bogucharovo to where the road was occupied by our troops. At the inn at
Yankovo he respectfully took leave of her, for the first time permitting himself
to kiss her hand.
"How can you speak so!" he blushingly replied to Princess Mary's expressions
of gratitude for her deliverance, as she termed what had occurred. "Any police
officer would have done as much! If we had had only peasants to fight, we
should not have let the enemy come so far," said he with a sense of shame and
wishing to change the subject. "I am only happy to have had the opportunity of
making your acquaintance. Good-bye, Princess. I wish you happiness and
consolation and hope to meet you again in happier circumstances. If you don't
want to make me blush, please don't thank me!"
But the princess, if she did not again thank him in words, thanked him with the
whole expression of her face, radiant with gratitude and tenderness. She could
not believe that there was nothing to thank him for. On the contrary, it seemed
to her certain that had he not been there she would have perished at the hands
of the mutineers and of the French, and that he had exposed himself to terrible
and obvious danger to save her, and even more certain was it that he was a
man of lofty and noble soul, able to understand her position and her sorrow.
His kind, honest eyes, with the tears rising in them when she herself had begun
to cry as she spoke of her loss, did not leave her memory.
When she had taken leave of him and remained alone she suddenly felt her
eyes filling with tears, and then not for the first time the strange question
presented itself to her: did she love him?
On the rest of the way to Moscow, though the princess' position was not a
cheerful one, Dunyasha, who went with her in the carriage, more than once
noticed that her mistress leaned out of the window and smiled at something
with an expression of mingled joy and sorrow.
"Well, supposing I do love him?" thought Princess Mary.
Ashamed as she was of acknowledging to herself that she had fallen in love
with a man who would perhaps never love her, she comforted herself with the
thought that no one would ever know it and that she would not be to blame if,
without ever speaking of it to anyone, she continued to the end of her life to
love the man with whom she had fallen in love for the first and last time in her
life.
Sometimes when she recalled his looks, his sympathy, and his words,
happiness did not appear impossible to her. It was at those moments that
Dunyasha noticed her smiling as she looked out of the carriage window.
"Was it not fate that brought him to Bogucharovo, and at that very moment?"
thought Princess Mary. "And that caused his sister to refuse my brother?" And
in all this Princess Mary saw the hand of Providence.
The impression the princess made on Rostov was a very agreeable one. To
remember her gave him pleasure, and when his comrades, hearing of his
adventure at Bogucharovo, rallied him on having gone to look for hay and
having picked up one of the wealthiest heiresses in Russia, he grew angry. It
made him angry just because the idea of marrying the gentle Princess Mary,
who was attractive to him and had an enormous fortune, had against his will
more than once entered his head. For himself personally Nicholas could not
wish for a better wife: by marrying her he would make the countess his mother
happy, would be able to put his father's affairs in order, and would even—he
felt it—ensure Princess Mary's happiness.
But Sonya? And his plighted word? That was why Rostov grew angry when
he was rallied about Princess Bolkonskaya.
CHAPTER XV
On receiving command of the armies Kutuzov remembered Prince Andrew
and sent an order for him to report at headquarters.
Prince Andrew arrived at Tsarevo-Zaymishche on the very day and at the very
hour that Kutuzov was reviewing the troops for the first time. He stopped in
the village at the priest's house in front of which stood the commander-inchief's carriage, and he sat down on the bench at the gate awaiting his Serene
Highness, as everyone now called Kutuzov. From the field beyond the village
came now sounds of regimental music and now the roar of many voices
shouting "Hurrah!" to the new commander-in-chief. Two orderlies, a courier
and a major-domo, stood near by, some ten paces from Prince Andrew,
availing themselves of Kutuzov's absence and of the fine weather. A short,
swarthy lieutenant colonel of hussars with thick mustaches and whiskers rode
up to the gate and, glancing at Prince Andrew, inquired whether his Serene
Highness was putting up there and whether he would soon be back.
Prince Andrew replied that he was not on his Serene Highness' staff but was
himself a new arrival. The lieutenant colonel turned to a smart orderly, who,
with the peculiar contempt with which a commander-in-chief's orderly speaks
to officers, replied:
"What? His Serene Highness? I expect he'll be here soon. What do you want?"
The lieutenant colonel of hussars smiled beneath his mustache at the orderly's
tone, dismounted, gave his horse to a dispatch runner, and approached
Bolkonski with a slight bow. Bolkonski made room for him on the bench and
the lieutenant colonel sat down beside him.
"You're also waiting for the commander-in-chief?" said he. "They say he
weceives evewyone, thank God!... It's awful with those sausage eaters!
Ermolov had weason to ask to be pwomoted to be a German! Now p'waps
Wussians will get a look in. As it was, devil only knows what was happening.
We kept wetweating and wetweating. Did you take part in the campaign?" he
asked.
"I had the pleasure," replied Prince Andrew, "not only of taking part in the
retreat but of losing in that retreat all I held dear—not to mention the estate
and home of my birth—my father, who died of grief. I belong to the province
of Smolensk."
"Ah? You're Pwince Bolkonski? Vewy glad to make your acquaintance! I'm
Lieutenant Colonel Denisov, better known as 'Vaska,'" said Denisov, pressing
Prince Andrew's hand and looking into his face with a particularly kindly
attention. "Yes, I heard," said he sympathetically, and after a short pause
added: "Yes, it's Scythian warfare. It's all vewy well—only not for those who
get it in the neck. So you are Pwince Andwew Bolkonski?" He swayed his
head. "Vewy pleased, Pwince, to make your acquaintance!" he repeated again,
smiling sadly, and he again pressed Prince Andrew's hand.
Prince Andrew knew Denisov from what Natasha had told him of her first
suitor. This memory carried him sadly and sweetly back to those painful
feelings of which he had not thought lately, but which still found place in his
soul. Of late he had received so many new and very serious impressions—
such as the retreat from Smolensk, his visit to Bald Hills, and the recent news
of his father's death—and had experienced so many emotions, that for a long
time past those memories had not entered his mind, and now that they did,
they did not act on him with nearly their former strength. For Denisov, too, the
memories awakened by the name of Bolkonski belonged to a distant, romantic
past, when after supper and after Natasha's singing he had proposed to a little
girl of fifteen without realizing what he was doing. He smiled at the
recollection of that time and of his love for Natasha, and passed at once to
what now interested him passionately and exclusively. This was a plan of
campaign he had devised while serving at the outposts during the retreat. He
had proposed that plan to Barclay de Tolly and now wished to propose it to
Kutuzov. The plan was based on the fact that the French line of operation was
too extended, and it proposed that instead of, or concurrently with, action on
the front to bar the advance of the French, we should attack their line of
communication. He began explaining his plan to Prince Andrew.
"They can't hold all that line. It's impossible. I will undertake to bweak
thwough. Give me five hundwed men and I will bweak the line, that's certain!
There's only one way—guewilla warfare!"
Denisov rose and began gesticulating as he explained his plan to Bolkonski. In
the midst of his explanation shouts were heard from the army, growing more
incoherent and more diffused, mingling with music and songs and coming
from the field where the review was held. Sounds of hoofs and shouts were
nearing the village.
"He's coming! He's coming!" shouted a Cossack standing at the gate.
Bolkonski and Denisov moved to the gate, at which a knot of soldiers (a guard
of honor) was standing, and they saw Kutuzov coming down the street
mounted on a rather small sorrel horse. A huge suite of generals rode behind
him. Barclay was riding almost beside him, and a crowd of officers ran after
and around them shouting, "Hurrah!"
His adjutants galloped into the yard before him. Kutuzov was impatiently
urging on his horse, which ambled smoothly under his weight, and he raised
his hand to his white Horse Guard's cap with a red band and no peak, nodding
his head continually. When he came up to the guard of honor, a fine set of
Grenadiers mostly wearing decorations, who were giving him the salute, he
looked at them silently and attentively for nearly a minute with the steady gaze
of a commander and then turned to the crowd of generals and officers
surrounding him. Suddenly his face assumed a subtle expression, he shrugged
his shoulders with an air of perplexity.
"And with such fine fellows to retreat and retreat! Well, good-by, General," he
added, and rode into the yard past Prince Andrew and Denisov.
"Hurrah! hurrah! hurrah!" shouted those behind him.
Since Prince Andrew had last seen him Kutuzov had grown still more
corpulent, flaccid, and fat. But the bleached eyeball, the scar, and the familiar
weariness of his expression were still the same. He was wearing the white
Horse Guard's cap and a military overcoat with a whip hanging over his
shoulder by a thin strap. He sat heavily and swayed limply on his brisk little
horse.
"Whew... whew... whew!" he whistled just audibly as he rode into the yard.
His face expressed the relief of relaxed strain felt by a man who means to rest
after a ceremony. He drew his left foot out of the stirrup and, lurching with his
whole body and puckering his face with the effort, raised it with difficulty
onto the saddle, leaned on his knee, groaned, and slipped down into the arms
of the Cossacks and adjutants who stood ready to assist him.
He pulled himself together, looked round, screwing up his eyes, glanced at
Prince Andrew, and, evidently not recognizing him, moved with his waddling
gait to the porch. "Whew... whew... whew!" he whistled, and again glanced at
Prince Andrew. As often occurs with old men, it was only after some seconds
that the impression produced by Prince Andrew's face linked itself up with
Kutuzov's remembrance of his personality.
"Ah, how do you do, my dear prince? How do you do, my dear boy? Come
along..." said he, glancing wearily round, and he stepped onto the porch which
creaked under his weight.
He unbuttoned his coat and sat down on a bench in the porch.
"And how's your father?"
"I received news of his death, yesterday," replied Prince Andrew abruptly.
Kutuzov looked at him with eyes wide open with dismay and then took off his
cap and crossed himself:
"May the kingdom of Heaven be his! God's will be done to us all!" He sighed
deeply, his whole chest heaving, and was silent for a while. "I loved him and
respected him, and sympathize with you with all my heart."
He embraced Prince Andrew, pressing him to his fat breast, and for some time
did not let him go. When he released him Prince Andrew saw that Kutuzov's
flabby lips were trembling and that tears were in his eyes. He sighed and
pressed on the bench with both hands to raise himself.
"Come! Come with me, we'll have a talk," said he.
But at that moment Denisov, no more intimidated by his superiors than by the
enemy, came with jingling spurs up the steps of the porch, despite the angry
whispers of the adjutants who tried to stop him. Kutuzov, his hands still
pressed on the seat, glanced at him glumly. Denisov, having given his name,
announced that he had to communicate to his Serene Highness a matter of
great importance for their country's welfare. Kutuzov looked wearily at him
and, lifting his hands with a gesture of annoyance, folded them across his
stomach, repeating the words: "For our country's welfare? Well, what is it?
Speak!" Denisov blushed like a girl (it was strange to see the color rise in that
shaggy, bibulous, time-worn face) and boldly began to expound his plan of
cutting the enemy's lines of communication between Smolensk and Vyazma.
Denisov came from those parts and knew the country well. His plan seemed
decidedly a good one, especially from the strength of conviction with which
he spoke. Kutuzov looked down at his own legs, occasionally glancing at the
door of the adjoining hut as if expecting something unpleasant to emerge from
it. And from that hut, while Denisov was speaking, a general with a portfolio
under his arm really did appear.
"What?" said Kutuzov, in the midst of Denisov's explanations, "are you ready
so soon?"
"Ready, your Serene Highness," replied the general.
Kutuzov swayed his head, as much as to say: "How is one man to deal with it
all?" and again listened to Denisov.
"I give my word of honor as a Wussian officer," said Denisov, "that I can
bweak Napoleon's line of communication!"
"What relation are you to Intendant General Kiril Andreevich Denisov?" asked
Kutuzov, interrupting him.
"He is my uncle, your Sewene Highness."
"Ah, we were friends," said Kutuzov cheerfully. "All right, all right, friend,
stay here at the staff and tomorrow we'll have a talk."
With a nod to Denisov he turned away and put out his hand for the papers
Konovnitsyn had brought him.
"Would not your Serene Highness like to come inside?" said the general on
duty in a discontented voice, "the plans must be examined and several papers
have to be signed."
An adjutant came out and announced that everything was in readiness within.
But Kutuzov evidently did not wish to enter that room till he was disengaged.
He made a grimace...
"No, tell them to bring a small table out here, my dear boy. I'll look at them
here," said he. "Don't go away," he added, turning to Prince Andrew, who
remained in the porch and listened to the general's report.
While this was being given, Prince Andrew heard the whisper of a woman's
voice and the rustle of a silk dress behind the door. Several times on glancing
that way he noticed behind that door a plump, rosy, handsome woman in a
pink dress with a lilac silk kerchief on her head, holding a dish and evidently
awaiting the entrance of the commander-in-chief. Kutuzov's adjutant
whispered to Prince Andrew that this was the wife of the priest whose home it
was, and that she intended to offer his Serene Highness bread and salt. "Her
husband has welcomed his Serene Highness with the cross at the church, and
she intends to welcome him in the house.... She's very pretty," added the
adjutant with a smile. At those words Kutuzov looked round. He was listening
to the general's report—which consisted chiefly of a criticism of the position
at Tsarevo-Zaymishche—as he had listened to Denisov, and seven years
previously had listened to the discussion at the Austerlitz council of war. He
evidently listened only because he had ears which, though there was a piece of
tow in one of them, could not help hearing; but it was evident that nothing the
general could say would surprise or even interest him, that he knew all that
would be said beforehand, and heard it all only because he had to, as one has
to listen to the chanting of a service of prayer. All that Denisov had said was
clever and to the point. What the general was saying was even more clever and
to the point, but it was evident that Kutuzov despised knowledge and
cleverness, and knew of something else that would decide the matter—
something independent of cleverness and knowledge. Prince Andrew watched
the commander-in-chief's face attentively, and the only expression he could
see there was one of boredom, curiosity as to the meaning of the feminine
whispering behind the door, and a desire to observe propriety. It was evident
that Kutuzov despised cleverness and learning and even the patriotic feeling
shown by Denisov, but despised them not because of his own intellect,
feelings, or knowledge—he did not try to display any of these—but because of
something else. He despised them because of his old age and experience of
life. The only instruction Kutuzov gave of his own accord during that report
referred to looting by the Russian troops. At the end of the report the general
put before him for signature a paper relating to the recovery of payment from
army commanders for green oats mown down by the soldiers, when
landowners lodged petitions for compensation.
After hearing the matter, Kutuzov smacked his lips together and shook his
head.
"Into the stove... into the fire with it! I tell you once for all, my dear fellow,"
said he, "into the fire with all such things! Let them cut the crops and burn
wood to their hearts' content. I don't order it or allow it, but I don't exact
compensation either. One can't get on without it. 'When wood is chopped the
chips will fly.'" He looked at the paper again. "Oh, this German precision!" he
muttered, shaking his head.
CHAPTER XVI
"Well, that's all!" said Kutuzov as he signed the last of the documents, and
rising heavily and smoothing out the folds in his fat white neck he moved
toward the door with a more cheerful expression.
The priest's wife, flushing rosy red, caught up the dish she had after all not
managed to present at the right moment, though she had so long been
preparing for it, and with a low bow offered it to Kutuzov.
He screwed up his eyes, smiled, lifted her chin with his hand, and said:
"Ah, what a beauty! Thank you, sweetheart!"
He took some gold pieces from his trouser pocket and put them on the dish for
her. "Well, my dear, and how are we getting on?" he asked, moving to the door
of the room assigned to him. The priest's wife smiled, and with dimples in her
rosy cheeks followed him into the room. The adjutant came out to the porch
and asked Prince Andrew to lunch with him. Half an hour later Prince Andrew
was again called to Kutuzov. He found him reclining in an armchair, still in the
same unbuttoned overcoat. He had in his hand a French book which he closed
as Prince Andrew entered, marking the place with a knife. Prince Andrew saw
by the cover that it was Les Chevaliers du Cygne by Madame de Genlis.
"Well, sit down, sit down here. Let's have a talk," said Kutuzov. "It's sad, very
sad. But remember, my dear fellow, that I am a father to you, a second
father...."
Prince Andrew told Kutuzov all he knew of his father's death, and what he had
seen at Bald Hills when he passed through it.
"What... what they have brought us to!" Kutuzov suddenly cried in an agitated
voice, evidently picturing vividly to himself from Prince Andrew's story the
condition Russia was in. "But give me time, give me time!" he said with a
grim look, evidently not wishing to continue this agitating conversation, and
added: "I sent for you to keep you with me."
"I thank your Serene Highness, but I fear I am no longer fit for the staff,"
replied Prince Andrew with a smile which Kutuzov noticed.
Kutuzov glanced inquiringly at him.
"But above all," added Prince Andrew, "I have grown used to my regiment, am
fond of the officers, and I fancy the men also like me. I should be sorry to
leave the regiment. If I decline the honor of being with you, believe me..."
A shrewd, kindly, yet subtly derisive expression lit up Kutuzov's podgy face.
He cut Bolkonski short.
"I am sorry, for I need you. But you're right, you're right! It's not here that men
are needed. Advisers are always plentiful, but men are not. The regiments
would not be what they are if the would-be advisers served there as you do. I
remember you at Austerlitz.... I remember, yes, I remember you with the
standard!" said Kutuzov, and a flush of pleasure suffused Prince Andrew's face
at this recollection.
Taking his hand and drawing him downwards, Kutuzov offered his cheek to be
kissed, and again Prince Andrew noticed tears in the old man's eyes. Though
Prince Andrew knew that Kutuzov's tears came easily, and that he was
particularly tender to and considerate of him from a wish to show sympathy
with his loss, yet this reminder of Austerlitz was both pleasant and flattering to
him.
"Go your way and God be with you. I know your path is the path of honor!"
He paused. "I missed you at Bucharest, but I needed someone to send." And
changing the subject, Kutuzov began to speak of the Turkish war and the
peace that had been concluded. "Yes, I have been much blamed," he said,
"both for that war and the peace... but everything came at the right time. Tout
vient a point a celui qui sait attendre. * And there were as many advisers there
as here..." he went on, returning to the subject of "advisers" which evidently
occupied him. "Ah, those advisers!" said he. "If we had listened to them all we
should not have made peace with Turkey and should not have been through
with that war. Everything in haste, but more haste, less speed. Kamenski
would have been lost if he had not died. He stormed fortresses with thirty
thousand men. It is not difficult to capture a fortress but it is difficult to win a
campaign. For that, not storming and attacking but patience and time are
wanted. Kamenski sent soldiers to Rustchuk, but I only employed these two
things and took more fortresses than Kamenski and made them Turks eat
horseflesh!" He swayed his head. "And the French shall too, believe me," he
went on, growing warmer and beating his chest, "I'll make them eat
horseflesh!" And tears again dimmed his eyes.
* "Everything comes in time to him who knows how to wait."
"But shan't we have to accept battle?" remarked Prince Andrew.
"We shall if everybody wants it; it can't be helped.... But believe me, my dear
boy, there is nothing stronger than those two: patience and time, they will do it
all. But the advisers n'entendent pas de cette oreille, voila le mal. * Some want
a thing—others don't. What's one to do?" he asked, evidently expecting an
answer. "Well, what do you want us to do?" he repeated and his eye shone
with a deep, shrewd look. "I'll tell you what to do," he continued, as Prince
Andrew still did not reply: "I will tell you what to do, and what I do. Dans le
doute, mon cher," he paused, "abstiens-toi" *(2)—he articulated the French
proverb deliberately.
* "Don't see it that way, that's the trouble."
* (2) "When in doubt, my dear fellow, do nothing."
"Well, good-by, my dear fellow; remember that with all my heart I share your
sorrow, and that for you I am not a Serene Highness, nor a prince, nor a
commander-in-chief, but a father! If you want anything come straight to me.
Good-bye, my dear boy."
Again he embraced and kissed Prince Andrew, but before the latter had left the
room Kutuzov gave a sigh of relief and went on with his unfinished novel, Les
Chevaliers du Cygne by Madame de Genlis.
Prince Andrew could not have explained how or why it was, but after that
interview with Kutuzov he went back to his regiment reassured as to the
general course of affairs and as to the man to whom it had been entrusted. The
more he realized the absence of all personal motive in that old man—in whom
there seemed to remain only the habit of passions, and in place of an intellect
(grouping events and drawing conclusions) only the capacity calmly to
contemplate the course of events—the more reassured he was that everything
would be as it should. "He will not bring in any plan of his own. He will not
devise or undertake anything," thought Prince Andrew, "but he will hear
everything, remember everything, and put everything in its place. He will not
hinder anything useful nor allow anything harmful. He understands that there
is something stronger and more important than his own will—the inevitable
course of events, and he can see them and grasp their significance, and seeing
that significance can refrain from meddling and renounce his personal wish
directed to something else. And above all," thought Prince Andrew, "one
believes in him because he's Russian, despite the novel by Genlis and the
French proverbs, and because his voice shook when he said: 'What they have
brought us to!' and had a sob in it when he said he would 'make them eat
horseflesh!'"
On such feelings, more or less dimly shared by all, the unanimity and general
approval were founded with which, despite court influences, the popular
choice of Kutuzov as commander-in-chief was received.
CHAPTER XVII
After the Emperor had left Moscow, life flowed on there in its usual course,
and its course was so very usual that it was difficult to remember the recent
days of patriotic elation and ardor, hard to believe that Russia was really in
danger and that the members of the English Club were also sons of the
Fatherland ready to sacrifice everything for it. The one thing that recalled the
patriotic fervor everyone had displayed during the Emperor's stay was the call
for contributions of men and money, a necessity that as soon as the promises
had been made assumed a legal, official form and became unavoidable.
With the enemy's approach to Moscow, the Moscovites' view of their situation
did not grow more serious but on the contrary became even more frivolous, as
always happens with people who see a great danger approaching. At the
approach of danger there are always two voices that speak with equal power in
the human soul: one very reasonably tells a man to consider the nature of the
danger and the means of escaping it; the other, still more reasonably, says that
it is too depressing and painful to think of the danger, since it is not in man's
power to foresee everything and avert the general course of events, and it is
therefore better to disregard what is painful till it comes, and to think about
what is pleasant. In solitude a man generally listens to the first voice, but in
society to the second. So it was now with the inhabitants of Moscow. It was
long since people had been as gay in Moscow as that year.
Rostopchin's broadsheets, headed by woodcuts of a drink shop, a potman, and
a Moscow burgher called Karpushka Chigirin, "who—having been a
militiaman and having had rather too much at the pub—heard that Napoleon
wished to come to Moscow, grew angry, abused the French in very bad
language, came out of the drink shop, and, under the sign of the eagle, began
to address the assembled people," were read and discussed, together with the
latest of Vasili Lvovich Pushkin's bouts rimes.
In the corner room at the club, members gathered to read these broadsheets,
and some liked the way Karpushka jeered at the French, saying: "They will
swell up with Russian cabbage, burst with our buckwheat porridge, and choke
themselves with cabbage soup. They are all dwarfs and one peasant woman
will toss three of them with a hayfork." Others did not like that tone and said it
was stupid and vulgar. It was said that Rostopchin had expelled all Frenchmen
and even all foreigners from Moscow, and that there had been some spies and
agents of Napoleon among them; but this was told chiefly to introduce
Rostopchin's witty remark on that occasion. The foreigners were deported to
Nizhni by boat, and Rostopchin had said to them in French: "Rentrez en
vousmemes; entrez dans la barque, et n'en faites pas une barque de Charon." *
There was talk of all the government offices having been already removed
from Moscow, and to this Shinshin's witticism was added—that for that alone
Moscow ought to be grateful to Napoleon. It was said that Mamonov's
regiment would cost him eight hundred thousand rubles, and that Bezukhov
had spent even more on his, but that the best thing about Bezukhov's action
was that he himself was going to don a uniform and ride at the head of his
regiment without charging anything for the show.
* "Think it over; get into the barque, and take care not to
make it a barque of Charon."
"You don't spare anyone," said Julie Drubetskaya as she collected and pressed
together a bunch of raveled lint with her thin, beringed fingers.
Julie was preparing to leave Moscow next day and was giving a farewell
soiree.
"Bezukhov est ridicule, but he is so kind and good-natured. What pleasure is
there to be so caustique?"
"A forfeit!" cried a young man in militia uniform whom Julie called "mon
chevalier," and who was going with her to Nizhni.
In Julie's set, as in many other circles in Moscow, it had been agreed that they
would speak nothing but Russian and that those who made a slip and spoke
French should pay fines to the Committee of Voluntary Contributions.
"Another forfeit for a Gallicism," said a Russian writer who was present.
"'What pleasure is there to be' is not Russian!"
"You spare no one," continued Julie to the young man without heeding the
author's remark.
"For caustique—I am guilty and will pay, and I am prepared to pay again for
the pleasure of telling you the truth. For Gallicisms I won't be responsible,"
she remarked, turning to the author: "I have neither the money nor the time,
like Prince Galitsyn, to engage a master to teach me Russian!"
"Ah, here he is!" she added. "Quand on... No, no," she said to the militia
officer, "you won't catch me. Speak of the sun and you see its rays!" and she
smiled amiably at Pierre. "We were just talking of you," she said with the
facility in lying natural to a society woman. "We were saying that your
regiment would be sure to be better than Mamonov's."
"Oh, don't talk to me of my regiment," replied Pierre, kissing his hostess' hand
and taking a seat beside her. "I am so sick of it."
"You will, of course, command it yourself?" said Julie, directing a sly,
sarcastic glance toward the militia officer.
The latter in Pierre's presence had ceased to be caustic, and his face expressed
perplexity as to what Julie's smile might mean. In spite of his absentmindedness and good nature, Pierre's personality immediately checked any
attempt to ridicule him to his face.
"No," said Pierre, with a laughing glance at his big, stout body. "I should make
too good a target for the French, besides I am afraid I should hardly be able to
climb onto a horse."
Among those whom Julie's guests happened to choose to gossip about were
the Rostovs.
"I hear that their affairs are in a very bad way," said Julie. "And he is so
unreasonable, the count himself I mean. The Razumovskis wanted to buy his
house and his estate near Moscow, but it drags on and on. He asks too much."
"No, I think the sale will come off in a few days," said someone. "Though it is
madness to buy anything in Moscow now."
"Why?" asked Julie. "You don't think Moscow is in danger?"
"Then why are you leaving?"
"I? What a question! I am going because... well, because everyone is going:
and besides—I am not Joan of Arc or an Amazon."
"Well, of course, of course! Let me have some more strips of linen."
"If he manages the business properly he will be able to pay off all his debts,"
said the militia officer, speaking of Rostov.
"A kindly old man but not up to much. And why do they stay on so long in
Moscow? They meant to leave for the country long ago. Natalie is quite well
again now, isn't she?" Julie asked Pierre with a knowing smile.
"They are waiting for their younger son," Pierre replied. "He joined
Obolenski's Cossacks and went to Belaya Tserkov where the regiment is being
formed. But now they have had him transferred to my regiment and are
expecting him every day. The count wanted to leave long ago, but the countess
won't on any account leave Moscow till her son returns."
"I met them the day before yesterday at the Arkharovs'. Natalie has recovered
her looks and is brighter. She sang a song. How easily some people get over
everything!"
"Get over what?" inquired Pierre, looking displeased.
Julie smiled.
"You know, Count, such knights as you are only found in Madame de Souza's
novels."
"What knights? What do you mean?" demanded Pierre, blushing.
"Oh, come, my dear count! C'est la fable de tout Moscou. Je vous admire, ma
parole d'honneur!" *
* "It is the talk of all Moscow. My word, I admire you!"
"Forfeit, forfeit!" cried the militia officer.
"All right, one can't talk—how tiresome!"
"What is 'the talk of all Moscow'?" Pierre asked angrily, rising to his feet.
"Come now, Count, you know!"
"I don't know anything about it," said Pierre.
"I know you were friendly with Natalie, and so... but I was always more
friendly with Vera—that dear Vera."
"No, madame!" Pierre continued in a tone of displeasure, "I have not taken on
myself the role of Natalie Rostova's knight at all, and have not been to their
house for nearly a month. But I cannot understand the cruelty..."
"Qui s'excuse s'accuse," * said Julie, smiling and waving the lint triumphantly,
and to have the last word she promptly changed the subject. "Do you know
what I heard today? Poor Mary Bolkonskaya arrived in Moscow yesterday. Do
you know that she has lost her father?"
* "Who excuses himself, accuses himself."
"Really? Where is she? I should like very much to see her," said Pierre.
"I spent the evening with her yesterday. She is going to their estate near
Moscow either today or tomorrow morning, with her nephew."
"Well, and how is she?" asked Pierre.
"She is well, but sad. But do you know who rescued her? It is quite a romance.
Nicholas Rostov! She was surrounded, and they wanted to kill her and had
wounded some of her people. He rushed in and saved her...."
"Another romance," said the militia officer. "Really, this general flight has
been arranged to get all the old maids married off. Catiche is one and Princess
Bolkonskaya another."
"Do you know, I really believe she is un petit peu amoureuse du jeune
homme." *
* "A little bit in love with the young man."
"Forfeit, forfeit, forfeit!"
"But how could one say that in Russian?"
CHAPTER XVIII
When Pierre returned home he was handed two of Rostopchin's broadsheets
that had been brought that day.
The first declared that the report that Count Rostopchin had forbidden people
to leave Moscow was false; on the contrary he was glad that ladies and
tradesmen's wives were leaving the city. "There will be less panic and less
gossip," ran the broadsheet "but I will stake my life on it that scoundrel will
not enter Moscow." These words showed Pierre clearly for the first time that
the French would enter Moscow. The second broadsheet stated that our
headquarters were at Vyazma, that Count Wittgenstein had defeated the
French, but that as many of the inhabitants of Moscow wished to be armed,
weapons were ready for them at the arsenal: sabers, pistols, and muskets
which could be had at a low price. The tone of the proclamation was not as
jocose as in the former Chigirin talks. Pierre pondered over these broadsheets.
Evidently the terrible stormcloud he had desired with the whole strength of his
soul but which yet aroused involuntary horror in him was drawing near.
"Shall I join the army and enter the service, or wait?" he asked himself for the
hundredth time. He took a pack of cards that lay on the table and began to lay
them out for a game of patience.
"If this patience comes out," he said to himself after shuffling the cards,
holding them in his hand, and lifting his head, "if it comes out, it means... what
does it mean?"
He had not decided what it should mean when he heard the voice of the eldest
princess at the door asking whether she might come in.
"Then it will mean that I must go to the army," said Pierre to himself. "Come
in, come in!" he added to the princess.
Only the eldest princess, the one with the stony face and long waist, was still
living in Pierre's house. The two younger ones had both married.
"Excuse my coming to you, cousin," she said in a reproachful and agitated
voice. "You know some decision must be come to. What is going to happen?
Everyone has left Moscow and the people are rioting. How is it that we are
staying on?"
"On the contrary, things seem satisfactory, ma cousine," said Pierre in the
bantering tone he habitually adopted toward her, always feeling uncomfortable
in the role of her benefactor.
"Satisfactory, indeed! Very satisfactory! Barbara Ivanovna told me today how
our troops are distinguishing themselves. It certainly does them credit! And
the people too are quite mutinous—they no longer obey, even my maid has
taken to being rude. At this rate they will soon begin beating us. One can't
walk in the streets. But, above all, the French will be here any day now, so
what are we waiting for? I ask just one thing of you, cousin," she went on,
"arrange for me to be taken to Petersburg. Whatever I may be, I can't live
under Bonaparte's rule."
"Oh, come, ma cousine! Where do you get your information from? On the
contrary..."
"I won't submit to your Napoleon! Others may if they please.... If you don't
want to do this..."
"But I will, I'll give the order at once."
The princess was apparently vexed at not having anyone to be angry with.
Muttering to herself, she sat down on a chair.
"But you have been misinformed," said Pierre. "Everything is quiet in the city
and there is not the slightest danger. See! I've just been reading..." He showed
her the broadsheet. "Count Rostopchin writes that he will stake his life on it
that the enemy will not enter Moscow."
"Oh, that count of yours!" said the princess malevolently. "He is a hypocrite, a
rascal who has himself roused the people to riot. Didn't he write in those
idiotic broadsheets that anyone, 'whoever it might be, should be dragged to the
lockup by his hair'? (How silly!) 'And honor and glory to whoever captures
him,' he says. This is what his cajolery has brought us to! Barbara Ivanovna
told me the mob near killed her because she said something in French."
"Oh, but it's so... You take everything so to heart," said Pierre, and began
laying out his cards for patience.
Although that patience did come out, Pierre did not join the army, but
remained in deserted Moscow ever in the same state of agitation, irresolution,
and alarm, yet at the same time joyfully expecting something terrible.
Next day toward evening the princess set off, and Pierre's head steward came
to inform him that the money needed for the equipment of his regiment could
not be found without selling one of the estates. In general the head steward
made out to Pierre that his project of raising a regiment would ruin him. Pierre
listened to him, scarcely able to repress a smile.
"Well then, sell it," said he. "What's to be done? I can't draw back now!"
The worse everything became, especially his own affairs, the better was Pierre
pleased and the more evident was it that the catastrophe he expected was
approaching. Hardly anyone he knew was left in town. Julie had gone, and so
had Princess Mary. Of his intimate friends only the Rostovs remained, but he
did not go to see them.
To distract his thoughts he drove that day to the village of Vorontsovo to see
the great balloon Leppich was constructing to destroy the foe, and a trial
balloon that was to go up next day. The balloon was not yet ready, but Pierre
learned that it was being constructed by the Emperor's desire. The Emperor
had written to Count Rostopchin as follows:
As soon as Leppich is ready, get together a crew of reliable and intelligent
men for his car and send a courier to General Kutuzov to let him know. I have
informed him of the matter.
Please impress upon Leppich to be very careful where he descends for the first
time, that he may not make a mistake and fall into the enemy's hands. It is
essential for him to combine his movements with those of the commander-inchief.
On his way home from Vorontsovo, as he was passing the Bolotnoe Place
Pierre, seeing a large crowd round the Lobnoe Place, stopped and got out of
his trap. A French cook accused of being a spy was being flogged. The
flogging was only just over, and the executioner was releasing from the
flogging bench a stout man with red whiskers, in blue stockings and a green
jacket, who was moaning piteously. Another criminal, thin and pale, stood
near. Judging by their faces they were both Frenchmen. With a frightened and
suffering look resembling that on the thin Frenchman's face, Pierre pushed his
way in through the crowd.
"What is it? Who is it? What is it for?" he kept asking.
But the attention of the crowd—officials, burghers, shopkeepers, peasants, and
women in cloaks and in pelisses—was so eagerly centered on what was
passing in Lobnoe Place that no one answered him. The stout man rose,
frowned, shrugged his shoulders, and evidently trying to appear firm began to
pull on his jacket without looking about him, but suddenly his lips trembled
and he began to cry, in the way full-blooded grown-up men cry, though angry
with himself for doing so. In the crowd people began talking loudly, to stifle
their feelings of pity as it seemed to Pierre.
"He's cook to some prince."
"Eh, mounseer, Russian sauce seems to be sour to a Frenchman... sets his teeth
on edge!" said a wrinkled clerk who was standing behind Pierre, when the
Frenchman began to cry.
The clerk glanced round, evidently hoping that his joke would be appreciated.
Some people began to laugh, others continued to watch in dismay the
executioner who was undressing the other man.
Pierre choked, his face puckered, and he turned hastily away, went back to his
trap muttering something to himself as he went, and took his seat. As they
drove along he shuddered and exclaimed several times so audibly that the
coachman asked him:
"What is your pleasure?"
"Where are you going?" shouted Pierre to the man, who was driving to
Lubyanka Street.
"To the Governor's, as you ordered," answered the coachman.
"Fool! Idiot!" shouted Pierre, abusing his coachman—a thing he rarely did.
"Home, I told you! And drive faster, blockhead!" "I must get away this very
day," he murmured to himself.
At the sight of the tortured Frenchman and the crowd surrounding the Lobnoe
Place, Pierre had so definitely made up his mind that he could no longer
remain in Moscow and would leave for the army that very day that it seemed
to him that either he had told the coachman this or that the man ought to have
known it for himself.
On reaching home Pierre gave orders to Evstafey—his head coachman who
knew everything, could do anything, and was known to all Moscow—that he
would leave that night for the army at Mozhaysk, and that his saddle horses
should be sent there. This could not all be arranged that day, so on Evstafey's
representation Pierre had to put off his departure till next day to allow time for
the relay horses to be sent on in advance.
On the twenty-fourth the weather cleared up after a spell of rain, and after
dinner Pierre left Moscow. When changing horses that night in Perkhushkovo,
he learned that there had been a great battle that evening. (This was the battle
of Shevardino.) He was told that there in Perkhushkovo the earth trembled
from the firing, but nobody could answer his questions as to who had won. At
dawn next day Pierre was approaching Mozhaysk.
Every house in Mozhaysk had soldiers quartered in it, and at the hostel where
Pierre was met by his groom and coachman there was no room to be had. It
was full of officers.
Everywhere in Mozhaysk and beyond it, troops were stationed or on the
march. Cossacks, foot and horse soldiers, wagons, caissons, and cannon were
everywhere. Pierre pushed forward as fast as he could, and the farther he left
Moscow behind and the deeper he plunged into that sea of troops the more
was he overcome by restless agitation and a new and joyful feeling he had not
experienced before. It was a feeling akin to what he had felt at the Sloboda
Palace during the Emperor's visit—a sense of the necessity of undertaking
something and sacrificing something. He now experienced a glad
consciousness that everything that constitutes men's happiness—the comforts
of life, wealth, even life itself—is rubbish it is pleasant to throw away,
compared with something... With what? Pierre could not say, and he did not
try to determine for whom and for what he felt such particular delight in
sacrificing everything. He was not occupied with the question of what to
sacrifice for; the fact of sacrificing in itself afforded him a new and joyous
sensation.
CHAPTER XIX
On the twenty-fourth of August the battle of the Shevardino Redoubt was
fought, on the twenty-fifth not a shot was fired by either side, and on the
twenty-sixth the battle of Borodino itself took place.
Why and how were the battles of Shevardino and Borodino given and
accepted? Why was the battle of Borodino fought? There was not the least
sense in it for either the French or the Russians. Its immediate result for the
Russians was, and was bound to be, that we were brought nearer to the
destruction of Moscow—which we feared more than anything in the world;
and for the French its immediate result was that they were brought nearer to
the destruction of their whole army—which they feared more than anything in
the world. What the result must be was quite obvious, and yet Napoleon
offered and Kutuzov accepted that battle.
If the commanders had been guided by reason, it would seem that it must have
been obvious to Napoleon that by advancing thirteen hundred miles and giving
battle with a probability of losing a quarter of his army, he was advancing to
certain destruction, and it must have been equally clear to Kutuzov that by
accepting battle and risking the loss of a quarter of his army he would
certainly lose Moscow. For Kutuzov this was mathematically clear, as it is that
if when playing draughts I have one man less and go on exchanging, I shall
certainly lose, and therefore should not exchange. When my opponent has
sixteen men and I have fourteen, I am only one eighth weaker than he, but
when I have exchanged thirteen more men he will be three times as strong as I
am.
Before the battle of Borodino our strength in proportion to the French was
about as five to six, but after that battle it was little more than one to two:
previously we had a hundred thousand against a hundred and twenty thousand;
afterwards little more than fifty thousand against a hundred thousand. Yet the
shrewd and experienced Kutuzov accepted the battle, while Napoleon, who
was said to be a commander of genius, gave it, losing a quarter of his army
and lengthening his lines of communication still more. If it is said that he
expected to end the campaign by occupying Moscow as he had ended a
previous campaign by occupying Vienna, there is much evidence to the
contrary. Napoleon's historians themselves tell us that from Smolensk onwards
he wished to stop, knew the danger of his extended position, and knew that the
occupation of Moscow would not be the end of the campaign, for he had seen
at Smolensk the state in which Russian towns were left to him, and had not
received a single reply to his repeated announcements of his wish to negotiate.
In giving and accepting battle at Borodino, Kutuzov acted involuntarily and
irrationally. But later on, to fit what had occurred, the historians provided
cunningly devised evidence of the foresight and genius of the generals who, of
all the blind tools of history were the most enslaved and involuntary.
The ancients have left us model heroic poems in which the heroes furnish the
whole interest of the story, and we are still unable to accustom ourselves to the
fact that for our epoch histories of that kind are meaningless.
On the other question, how the battle of Borodino and the preceding battle of
Shevardino were fought, there also exists a definite and well-known, but quite
false, conception. All the historians describe the affair as follows:
The Russian army, they say, in its retreat from Smolensk sought out for itself
the best position for a general engagement and found such a position at
Borodino.
The Russians, they say, fortified this position in advance on the left of the
highroad (from Moscow to Smolensk) and almost at a right angle to it, from
Borodino to Utitsa, at the very place where the battle was fought.
In front of this position, they say, a fortified outpost was set up on the
Shevardino mound to observe the enemy. On the twenty-fourth, we are told,
Napoleon attacked this advanced post and took it, and, on the twenty-sixth,
attacked the whole Russian army, which was in position on the field of
Borodino.
So the histories say, and it is all quite wrong, as anyone who cares to look into
the matter can easily convince himself.
The Russians did not seek out the best position but, on the contrary, during the
retreat passed many positions better than Borodino. They did not stop at any
one of these positions because Kutuzov did not wish to occupy a position he
had not himself chosen, because the popular demand for a battle had not yet
expressed itself strongly enough, and because Miloradovich had not yet
arrived with the militia, and for many other reasons. The fact is that other
positions they had passed were stronger, and that the position at Borodino (the
one where the battle was fought), far from being strong, was no more a
position than any other spot one might find in the Russian Empire by sticking
a pin into the map at hazard.
Not only did the Russians not fortify the position on the field of Borodino to
the left of, and at a right angle to, the highroad (that is, the position on which
the battle took place), but never till the twenty-fifth of August, 1812, did they
think that a battle might be fought there. This was shown first by the fact that
there were no entrenchments there by the twenty fifth and that those begun on
the twenty-fifth and twenty-sixth were not completed, and secondly, by the
position of the Shevardino Redoubt. That redoubt was quite senseless in front
of the position where the battle was accepted. Why was it more strongly
fortified than any other post? And why were all efforts exhausted and six
thousand men sacrificed to defend it till late at night on the twenty-fourth? A
Cossack patrol would have sufficed to observe the enemy. Thirdly, as proof
that the position on which the battle was fought had not been foreseen and that
the Shevardino Redoubt was not an advanced post of that position, we have
the fact that up to the twenty-fifth, Barclay de Tolly and Bagration were
convinced that the Shevardino Redoubt was the left flank of the position, and
that Kutuzov himself in his report, written in hot haste after the battle, speaks
of the Shevardino Redoubt as the left flank of the position. It was much later,
when reports on the battle of Borodino were written at leisure, that the
incorrect and extraordinary statement was invented (probably to justify the
mistakes of a commander-in-chief who had to be represented as infallible) that
the Shevardino Redoubt was an advanced post—whereas in reality it was
simply a fortified point on the left flank—and that the battle of Borodino was
fought by us on an entrenched position previously selected, where as it was
fought on a quite unexpected spot which was almost unentrenched.
The case was evidently this: a position was selected along the river Kolocha—
which crosses the highroad not at a right angle but at an acute angle—so that
the left flank was at Shevardino, the right flank near the village of Novoe, and
the center at Borodino at the confluence of the rivers Kolocha and Voyna.
To anyone who looks at the field of Borodino without thinking of how the
battle was actually fought, this position, protected by the river Kolocha,
presents itself as obvious for an army whose object was to prevent an enemy
from advancing along the Smolensk road to Moscow.
Napoleon, riding to Valuevo on the twenty-fourth, did not see (as the history
books say he did) the position of the Russians from Utitsa to Borodino (he
could not have seen that position because it did not exist), nor did he see an
advanced post of the Russian army, but while pursuing the Russian rearguard
he came upon the left flank of the Russian position—at the Shevardino
Redoubt—and unexpectedly for the Russians moved his army across the
Kolocha. And the Russians, not having time to begin a general engagement,
withdrew their left wing from the position they had intended to occupy and
took up a new position which had not been foreseen and was not fortified. By
crossing to the other side of the Kolocha to the left of the highroad, Napoleon
shifted the whole forthcoming battle from right to left (looking from the
Russian side) and transferred it to the plain between Utitsa, Semenovsk, and
Borodino—a plain no more advantageous as a position than any other plain in
Russia—and there the whole battle of the twenty-sixth of August took place.
Had Napoleon not ridden out on the evening of the twenty-fourth to the
Kolocha, and had he not then ordered an immediate attack on the redoubt but
had begun the attack next morning, no one would have doubted that the
Shevardino Redoubt was the left flank of our position, and the battle would
have taken place where we expected it. In that case we should probably have
defended the Shevardino Redoubt—our left flank—still more obstinately. We
should have attacked Napoleon in the center or on the right, and the
engagement would have taken place on the twenty-fifth, in the position we
intended and had fortified. But as the attack on our left flank took place in the
evening after the retreat of our rear guard (that is, immediately after the fight
at Gridneva), and as the Russian commanders did not wish, or were not in
time, to begin a general engagement then on the evening of the twenty-fourth,
the first and chief action of the battle of Borodino was already lost on the
twenty-fourth, and obviously led to the loss of the one fought on the twentysixth.
After the loss of the Shevardino Redoubt, we found ourselves on the morning
of the twenty-fifth without a position for our left flank, and were forced to
bend it back and hastily entrench it where it chanced to be.
Not only was the Russian army on the twenty-sixth defended by weak,
unfinished entrenchments, but the disadvantage of that position was increased
by the fact that the Russian commanders—not having fully realized what had
happened, namely the loss of our position on the left flank and the shifting of
the whole field of the forthcoming battle from right to left—maintained their
extended position from the village of Novoe to Utitsa, and consequently had to
move their forces from right to left during the battle. So it happened that
throughout the whole battle the Russians opposed the entire French army
launched against our left flank with but half as many men. (Poniatowski's
action against Utitsa, and Uvarov's on the right flank against the French, were
actions distinct from the main course of the battle.) So the battle of Borodino
did not take place at all as (in an effort to conceal our commanders' mistakes
even at the cost of diminishing the glory due to the Russian army and people)
it has been described. The battle of Borodino was not fought on a chosen and
entrenched position with forces only slightly weaker than those of the enemy,
but, as a result of the loss of the Shevardino Redoubt, the Russians fought the
battle of Borodino on an open and almost unentrenched position, with forces
only half as numerous as the French; that is to say, under conditions in which
it was not merely unthinkable to fight for ten hours and secure an indecisive
result, but unthinkable to keep an army even from complete disintegration and
flight.
CHAPTER XX
On the morning of the twenty-fifth Pierre was leaving Mozhaysk. At the
descent of the high steep hill, down which a winding road led out of the town
past the cathedral on the right, where a service was being held and the bells
were ringing, Pierre got out of his vehicle and proceeded on foot. Behind him
a cavalry regiment was coming down the hill preceded by its singers. Coming
up toward him was a train of carts carrying men who had been wounded in the
engagement the day before. The peasant drivers, shouting and lashing their
horses, kept crossing from side to side. The carts, in each of which three or
four wounded soldiers were lying or sitting, jolted over the stones that had
been thrown on the steep incline to make it something like a road. The
wounded, bandaged with rags, with pale cheeks, compressed lips, and knitted
brows, held on to the sides of the carts as they were jolted against one another.
Almost all of them stared with naive, childlike curiosity at Pierre's white hat
and green swallow-tail coat.
Pierre's coachman shouted angrily at the convoy of wounded to keep to one
side of the road. The cavalry regiment, as it descended the hill with its singers,
surrounded Pierre's carriage and blocked the road. Pierre stopped, being
pressed against the side of the cutting in which the road ran. The sunshine
from behind the hill did not penetrate into the cutting and there it was cold and
damp, but above Pierre's head was the bright August sunshine and the bells
sounded merrily. One of the carts with wounded stopped by the side of the
road close to Pierre. The driver in his bast shoes ran panting up to it, placed a
stone under one of its tireless hind wheels, and began arranging the breechband on his little horse.
One of the wounded, an old soldier with a bandaged arm who was following
the cart on foot, caught hold of it with his sound hand and turned to look at
Pierre.
"I say, fellow countryman! Will they set us down here or take us on to
Moscow?" he asked.
Pierre was so deep in thought that he did not hear the question. He was
looking now at the cavalry regiment that had met the convoy of wounded, now
at the cart by which he was standing, in which two wounded men were sitting
and one was lying. One of those sitting up in the cart had probably been
wounded in the cheek. His whole head was wrapped in rags and one cheek
was swollen to the size of a baby's head. His nose and mouth were twisted to
one side. This soldier was looking at the cathedral and crossing himself.
Another, a young lad, a fair-haired recruit as white as though there was no
blood in his thin face, looked at Pierre kindly, with a fixed smile. The third lay
prone so that his face was not visible. The cavalry singers were passing close
by:
Ah lost, quite lost... is my head so keen,
Living in a foreign land.
they sang their soldiers' dance song.
As if responding to them but with a different sort of merriment, the metallic
sound of the bells reverberated high above and the hot rays of the sun bathed
the top of the opposite slope with yet another sort of merriment. But beneath
the slope, by the cart with the wounded near the panting little nag where Pierre
stood, it was damp, somber, and sad.
The soldier with the swollen cheek looked angrily at the cavalry singers.
"Oh, the coxcombs!" he muttered reproachfully.
"It's not the soldiers only, but I've seen peasants today, too.... The peasants—
even they have to go," said the soldier behind the cart, addressing Pierre with a
sad smile. "No distinctions made nowadays.... They want the whole nation to
fall on them—in a word, it's Moscow! They want to make an end of it."
In spite of the obscurity of the soldier's words Pierre understood what he
wanted to say and nodded approval.
The road was clear again; Pierre descended the hill and drove on.
He kept looking to either side of the road for familiar faces, but only saw
everywhere the unfamiliar faces of various military men of different branches
of the service, who all looked with astonishment at his white hat and green tail
coat.
Having gone nearly three miles he at last met an acquaintance and eagerly
addressed him. This was one of the head army doctors. He was driving toward
Pierre in a covered gig, sitting beside a young surgeon, and on recognizing
Pierre he told the Cossack who occupied the driver's seat to pull up.
"Count! Your excellency, how come you to be here?" asked the doctor.
"Well, you know, I wanted to see..."
"Yes, yes, there will be something to see...."
Pierre got out and talked to the doctor, explaining his intention of taking part
in a battle.
The doctor advised him to apply direct to Kutuzov.
"Why should you be God knows where out of sight, during the battle?" he
said, exchanging glances with his young companion. "Anyhow his Serene
Highness knows you and will receive you graciously. That's what you must
do."
The doctor seemed tired and in a hurry.
"You think so?... Ah, I also wanted to ask you where our position is exactly?"
said Pierre.
"The position?" repeated the doctor. "Well, that's not my line. Drive past
Tatarinova, a lot of digging is going on there. Go up the hillock and you'll
see."
"Can one see from there?... If you would..."
But the doctor interrupted him and moved toward his gig.
"I would go with you but on my honor I'm up to here"—and he pointed to his
throat. "I'm galloping to the commander of the corps. How do matters stand?...
You know, Count, there'll be a battle tomorrow. Out of an army of a hundred
thousand we must expect at least twenty thousand wounded, and we haven't
stretchers, or bunks, or dressers, or doctors enough for six thousand. We have
ten thousand carts, but we need other things as well—we must manage as best
we can!"
The strange thought that of the thousands of men, young and old, who had
stared with merry surprise at his hat (perhaps the very men he had noticed),
twenty thousand were inevitably doomed to wounds and death amazed Pierre.
"They may die tomorrow; why are they thinking of anything but death?" And
by some latent sequence of thought the descent of the Mozhaysk hill, the carts
with the wounded, the ringing bells, the slanting rays of the sun, and the songs
of the cavalrymen vividly recurred to his mind.
"The cavalry ride to battle and meet the wounded and do not for a moment
think of what awaits them, but pass by, winking at the wounded. Yet from
among these men twenty thousand are doomed to die, and they wonder at my
hat! Strange!" thought Pierre, continuing his way to Tatarinova.
In front of a landowner's house to the left of the road stood carriages, wagons,
and crowds of orderlies and sentinels. The commander-in-chief was putting up
there, but just when Pierre arrived he was not in and hardly any of the staff
were there—they had gone to the church service. Pierre drove on toward
Gorki.
When he had ascended the hill and reached the little village street, he saw for
the first time peasant militiamen in their white shirts and with crosses on their
caps, who, talking and laughing loudly, animated and perspiring, were at work
on a huge knoll overgrown with grass to the right of the road.
Some of them were digging, others were wheeling barrowloads of earth along
planks, while others stood about doing nothing.
Two officers were standing on the knoll, directing the men. On seeing these
peasants, who were evidently still amused by the novelty of their position as
soldiers, Pierre once more thought of the wounded men at Mozhaysk and
understood what the soldier had meant when he said: "They want the whole
nation to fall on them." The sight of these bearded peasants at work on the
battlefield, with their queer, clumsy boots and perspiring necks, and their
shirts opening from the left toward the middle, unfastened, exposing their
sunburned collarbones, impressed Pierre more strongly with the solemnity and
importance of the moment than anything he had yet seen or heard.
CHAPTER XXI
Pierre stepped out of his carriage and, passing the toiling militiamen, ascended
the knoll from which, according to the doctor, the battlefield could be seen.
It was about eleven o'clock. The sun shone somewhat to the left and behind
him and brightly lit up the enormous panorama which, rising like an
amphitheater, extended before him in the clear rarefied atmosphere.
From above on the left, bisecting that amphitheater, wound the Smolensk
highroad, passing through a village with a white church some five hundred
paces in front of the knoll and below it. This was Borodino. Below the village
the road crossed the river by a bridge and, winding down and up, rose higher
and higher to the village of Valuevo visible about four miles away, where
Napoleon was then stationed. Beyond Valuevo the road disappeared into a
yellowing forest on the horizon. Far in the distance in that birch and fir forest
to the right of the road, the cross and belfry of the Kolocha Monastery
gleamed in the sun. Here and there over the whole of that blue expanse, to
right and left of the forest and the road, smoking campfires could be seen and
indefinite masses of troops—ours and the enemy's. The ground to the right—
along the course of the Kolocha and Moskva rivers—was broken and hilly.
Between the hollows the villages of Bezubova and Zakharino showed in the
distance. On the left the ground was more level; there were fields of grain, and
the smoking ruins of Semenovsk, which had been burned down, could be seen.
All that Pierre saw was so indefinite that neither the left nor the right side of
the field fully satisfied his expectations. Nowhere could he see the battlefield
he had expected to find, but only fields, meadows, troops, woods, the smoke
of campfires, villages, mounds, and streams; and try as he would he could
descry no military "position" in this place which teemed with life, nor could he
even distinguish our troops from the enemy's.
"I must ask someone who knows," he thought, and addressed an officer who
was looking with curiosity at his huge unmilitary figure.
"May I ask you," said Pierre, "what village that is in front?"
"Burdino, isn't it?" said the officer, turning to his companion.
"Borodino," the other corrected him.
The officer, evidently glad of an opportunity for a talk, moved up to Pierre.
"Are those our men there?" Pierre inquired.
"Yes, and there, further on, are the French," said the officer. "There they are,
there... you can see them."
"Where? Where?" asked Pierre.
"One can see them with the naked eye... Why, there!"
The officer pointed with his hand to the smoke visible on the left beyond the
river, and the same stern and serious expression that Pierre had noticed on
many of the faces he had met came into his face.
"Ah, those are the French! And over there?..." Pierre pointed to a knoll on the
left, near which some troops could be seen.
"Those are ours."
"Ah, ours! And there?..." Pierre pointed to another knoll in the distance with a
big tree on it, near a village that lay in a hollow where also some campfires
were smoking and something black was visible.
"That's his again," said the officer. (It was the Shevardino Redoubt.) "It was
ours yesterday, but now it is his."
"Then how about our position?"
"Our position?" replied the officer with a smile of satisfaction. "I can tell you
quite clearly, because I constructed nearly all our entrenchments. There, you
see? There's our center, at Borodino, just there," and he pointed to the village
in front of them with the white church. "That's where one crosses the Kolocha.
You see down there where the rows of hay are lying in the hollow, there's the
bridge. That's our center. Our right flank is over there"—he pointed sharply to
the right, far away in the broken ground—"That's where the Moskva River is,
and we have thrown up three redoubts there, very strong ones. The left
flank..." here the officer paused. "Well, you see, that's difficult to explain....
Yesterday our left flank was there at Shevardino, you see, where the oak is, but
now we have withdrawn our left wing—now it is over there, do you see that
village and the smoke? That's Semenovsk, yes, there," he pointed to Raevski's
knoll. "But the battle will hardly be there. His having moved his troops there is
only a ruse; he will probably pass round to the right of the Moskva. But
wherever it may be, many a man will be missing tomorrow!" he remarked.