CHAPTER I
After Prince Andrew's engagement to Natasha, Pierre without any apparent
cause suddenly felt it impossible to go on living as before. Firmly convinced
as he was of the truths revealed to him by his benefactor, and happy as he had
been in perfecting his inner man, to which he had devoted himself with such
ardor—all the zest of such a life vanished after the engagement of Andrew and
Natasha and the death of Joseph Alexeevich, the news of which reached him
almost at the same time. Only the skeleton of life remained: his house, a
brilliant wife who now enjoyed the favors of a very important personage,
acquaintance with all Petersburg, and his court service with its dull formalities.
And this life suddenly seemed to Pierre unexpectedly loathsome. He ceased
keeping a diary, avoided the company of the Brothers, began going to the club
again, drank a great deal, and came once more in touch with the bachelor sets,
leading such a life that the Countess Helene thought it necessary to speak
severely to him about it. Pierre felt that she was right, and to avoid
compromising her went away to Moscow.
In Moscow as soon as he entered his huge house in which the faded and fading
princesses still lived, with its enormous retinue; as soon as, driving through the
town, he saw the Iberian shrine with innumerable tapers burning before the
golden covers of the icons, the Kremlin Square with its snow undisturbed by
vehicles, the sleigh drivers and hovels of the Sivtsev Vrazhok, those old
Moscovites who desired nothing, hurried nowhere, and were ending their days
leisurely; when he saw those old Moscow ladies, the Moscow balls, and the
English Club, he felt himself at home in a quiet haven. In Moscow he felt at
peace, at home, warm and dirty as in an old dressing gown.
Moscow society, from the old women down to the children, received Pierre
like a long-expected guest whose place was always ready awaiting him. For
Moscow society Pierre was the nicest, kindest, most intellectual, merriest, and
most magnanimous of cranks, a heedless, genial nobleman of the old Russian
type. His purse was always empty because it was open to everyone.
Benefit performances, poor pictures, statues, benevolent societies, gypsy
choirs, schools, subscription dinners, sprees, Freemasons, churches, and books
—no one and nothing met with a refusal from him, and had it not been for two
friends who had borrowed large sums from him and taken him under their
protection, he would have given everything away. There was never a dinner or
soiree at the club without him. As soon as he sank into his place on the sofa
after two bottles of Margaux he was surrounded, and talking, disputing, and
joking began. When there were quarrels, his kindly smile and well-timed jests
reconciled the antagonists. The masonic dinners were dull and dreary when he
was not there.
When after a bachelor supper he rose with his amiable and kindly smile,
yielding to the entreaties of the festive company to drive off somewhere with
them, shouts of delight and triumph arose among the young men. At balls he
danced if a partner was needed. Young ladies, married and unmarried, liked
him because without making love to any of them, he was equally amiable to
all, especially after supper. "Il est charmant; il n'a pas de sexe," * they said of
him.
* "He is charming; he has no sex."
Pierre was one of those retired gentlemen-in-waiting of whom there were
hundreds good-humoredly ending their days in Moscow.
How horrified he would have been seven years before, when he first arrived
from abroad, had he been told that there was no need for him to seek or plan
anything, that his rut had long been shaped, eternally predetermined, and that
wriggle as he might, he would be what all in his position were. He could not
have believed it! Had he not at one time longed with all his heart to establish a
republic in Russia; then himself to be a Napoleon; then to be a philosopher;
and then a strategist and the conqueror of Napoleon? Had he not seen the
possibility of, and passionately desired, the regeneration of the sinful human
race, and his own progress to the highest degree of perfection? Had he not
established schools and hospitals and liberated his serfs?
But instead of all that—here he was, the wealthy husband of an unfaithful
wife, a retired gentleman-in-waiting, fond of eating and drinking and, as he
unbuttoned his waistcoat, of abusing the government a bit, a member of the
Moscow English Club, and a universal favorite in Moscow society. For a long
time he could not reconcile himself to the idea that he was one of those same
retired Moscow gentlemen-in-waiting he had so despised seven years before.
Sometimes he consoled himself with the thought that he was only living this
life temporarily; but then he was shocked by the thought of how many, like
himself, had entered that life and that club temporarily, with all their teeth and
hair, and had only left it when not a single tooth or hair remained.
In moments of pride, when he thought of his position it seemed to him that he
was quite different and distinct from those other retired gentlemen-in-waiting
he had formerly despised: they were empty, stupid, contented fellows, satisfied
with their position, "while I am still discontented and want to do something for
mankind. But perhaps all these comrades of mine struggled just like me and
sought something new, a path in life of their own, and like me were brought by
force of circumstances, society, and race—by that elemental force against
which man is powerless—to the condition I am in," said he to himself in
moments of humility; and after living some time in Moscow he no longer
despised, but began to grow fond of, to respect, and to pity his comrades in
destiny, as he pitied himself.
Pierre no longer suffered moments of despair, hypochondria, and disgust with
life, but the malady that had formerly found expression in such acute attacks
was driven inwards and never left him for a moment. "What for? Why? What
is going on in the world?" he would ask himself in perplexity several times a
day, involuntarily beginning to reflect anew on the meaning of the phenomena
of life; but knowing by experience that there were no answers to these
questions he made haste to turn away from them, and took up a book, or
hurried off to the club or to Apollon Nikolaevich's, to exchange the gossip of
the town.
"Helene, who has never cared for anything but her own body and is one of the
stupidest women in the world," thought Pierre, "is regarded by people as the
acme of intelligence and refinement, and they pay homage to her. Napoleon
Bonaparte was despised by all as long as he was great, but now that he has
become a wretched comedian the Emperor Francis wants to offer him his
daughter in an illegal marriage. The Spaniards, through the Catholic clergy,
offer praise to God for their victory over the French on the fourteenth of June,
and the French, also through the Catholic clergy, offer praise because on that
same fourteenth of June they defeated the Spaniards. My brother Masons
swear by the blood that they are ready to sacrifice everything for their
neighbor, but they do not give a ruble each to the collections for the poor, and
they intrigue, the Astraea Lodge against the Manna Seekers, and fuss about an
authentic Scotch carpet and a charter that nobody needs, and the meaning of
which the very man who wrote it does not understand. We all profess the
Christian law of forgiveness of injuries and love of our neighbors, the law in
honor of which we have built in Moscow forty times forty churches—but
yesterday a deserter was knouted to death and a minister of that same law of
love and forgiveness, a priest, gave the soldier a cross to kiss before his
execution." So thought Pierre, and the whole of this general deception which
everyone accepts, accustomed as he was to it, astonished him each time as if it
were something new. "I understand the deception and confusion," he thought,
"but how am I to tell them all that I see? I have tried, and have always found
that they too in the depths of their souls understand it as I do, and only try not
to see it. So it appears that it must be so! But I—what is to become of me?"
thought he. He had the unfortunate capacity many men, especially Russians,
have of seeing and believing in the possibility of goodness and truth, but of
seeing the evil and falsehood of life too clearly to be able to take a serious part
in it. Every sphere of work was connected, in his eyes, with evil and
deception. Whatever he tried to be, whatever he engaged in, the evil and
falsehood of it repulsed him and blocked every path of activity. Yet he had to
live and to find occupation. It was too dreadful to be under the burden of these
insoluble problems, so he abandoned himself to any distraction in order to
forget them. He frequented every kind of society, drank much, bought pictures,
engaged in building, and above all—read.
He read, and read everything that came to hand. On coming home, while his
valets were still taking off his things, he picked up a book and began to read.
From reading he passed to sleeping, from sleeping to gossip in drawing rooms
of the club, from gossip to carousals and women; from carousals back to
gossip, reading, and wine. Drinking became more and more a physical and
also a moral necessity. Though the doctors warned him that with his
corpulence wine was dangerous for him, he drank a great deal. He was only
quite at ease when having poured several glasses of wine mechanically into his
large mouth he felt a pleasant warmth in his body, an amiability toward all his
fellows, and a readiness to respond superficially to every idea without probing
it deeply. Only after emptying a bottle or two did he feel dimly that the terribly
tangled skein of life which previously had terrified him was not as dreadful as
he had thought. He was always conscious of some aspect of that skein, as with
a buzzing in his head after dinner or supper he chatted or listened to
conversation or read. But under the influence of wine he said to himself: "It
doesn't matter. I'll get it unraveled. I have a solution ready, but have no time
now—I'll think it all out later on!" But the later on never came.
In the morning, on an empty stomach, all the old questions appeared as
insoluble and terrible as ever, and Pierre hastily picked up a book, and if
anyone came to see him he was glad.
Sometimes he remembered how he had heard that soldiers in war when
entrenched under the enemy's fire, if they have nothing to do, try hard to find
some occupation the more easily to bear the danger. To Pierre all men seemed
like those soldiers, seeking refuge from life: some in ambition, some in cards,
some in framing laws, some in women, some in toys, some in horses, some in
politics, some in sport, some in wine, and some in governmental affairs.
"Nothing is trivial, and nothing is important, it's all the same—only to save
oneself from it as best one can," thought Pierre. "Only not to see it, that
dreadful it!"
CHAPTER II
At the beginning of winter Prince Nicholas Bolkonski and his daughter moved
to Moscow. At that time enthusiasm for the Emperor Alexander's regime had
weakened and a patriotic and anti-French tendency prevailed there, and this,
together with his past and his intellect and his originality, at once made Prince
Nicholas Bolkonski an object of particular respect to the Moscovites and the
center of the Moscow opposition to the government.
The prince had aged very much that year. He showed marked signs of senility
by a tendency to fall asleep, forgetfulness of quite recent events, remembrance
of remote ones, and the childish vanity with which he accepted the role of
head of the Moscow opposition. In spite of this the old man inspired in all his
visitors alike a feeling of respectful veneration—especially of an evening
when he came in to tea in his old-fashioned coat and powdered wig and,
aroused by anyone, told his abrupt stories of the past, or uttered yet more
abrupt and scathing criticisms of the present. For them all, that old-fashioned
house with its gigantic mirrors, pre-Revolution furniture, powdered footmen,
and the stern shrewd old man (himself a relic of the past century) with his
gentle daughter and the pretty Frenchwoman who were reverently devoted to
him presented a majestic and agreeable spectacle. But the visitors did not
reflect that besides the couple of hours during which they saw their host, there
were also twenty-two hours in the day during which the private and intimate
life of the house continued.
Latterly that private life had become very trying for Princess Mary. There in
Moscow she was deprived of her greatest pleasures—talks with the pilgrims
and the solitude which refreshed her at Bald Hills—and she had none of the
advantages and pleasures of city life. She did not go out into society; everyone
knew that her father would not let her go anywhere without him, and his
failing health prevented his going out himself, so that she was not invited to
dinners and evening parties. She had quite abandoned the hope of getting
married. She saw the coldness and malevolence with which the old prince
received and dismissed the young men, possible suitors, who sometimes
appeared at their house. She had no friends: during this visit to Moscow she
had been disappointed in the two who had been nearest to her. Mademoiselle
Bourienne, with whom she had never been able to be quite frank, had now
become unpleasant to her, and for various reasons Princess Mary avoided her.
Julie, with whom she had corresponded for the last five years, was in Moscow,
but proved to be quite alien to her when they met. Just then Julie, who by the
death of her brothers had become one of the richest heiresses in Moscow, was
in the full whirl of society pleasures. She was surrounded by young men who,
she fancied, had suddenly learned to appreciate her worth. Julie was at that
stage in the life of a society woman when she feels that her last chance of
marrying has come and that her fate must be decided now or never. On
Thursdays Princess Mary remembered with a mournful smile that she now had
no one to write to, since Julie—whose presence gave her no pleasure was here
and they met every week. Like the old emigre who declined to marry the lady
with whom he had spent his evenings for years, she regretted Julie's presence
and having no one to write to. In Moscow Princess Mary had no one to talk to,
no one to whom to confide her sorrow, and much sorrow fell to her lot just
then. The time for Prince Andrew's return and marriage was approaching, but
his request to her to prepare his father for it had not been carried out; in fact, it
seemed as if matters were quite hopeless, for at every mention of the young
Countess Rostova the old prince (who apart from that was usually in a bad
temper) lost control of himself. Another lately added sorrow arose from the
lessons she gave her six year-old nephew. To her consternation she detected in
herself in relation to little Nicholas some symptoms of her father's irritability.
However often she told herself that she must not get irritable when teaching
her nephew, almost every time that, pointer in hand, she sat down to show him
the French alphabet, she so longed to pour her own knowledge quickly and
easily into the child—who was already afraid that Auntie might at any
moment get angry—that at his slightest inattention she trembled, became
flustered and heated, raised her voice, and sometimes pulled him by the arm
and put him in the corner. Having put him in the corner she would herself
begin to cry over her cruel, evil nature, and little Nicholas, following her
example, would sob, and without permission would leave his corner, come to
her, pull her wet hands from her face, and comfort her. But what distressed the
princess most of all was her father's irritability, which was always directed
against her and had of late amounted to cruelty. Had he forced her to prostrate
herself to the ground all night, had he beaten her or made her fetch wood or
water, it would never have entered her mind to think her position hard; but this
loving despot—the more cruel because he loved her and for that reason
tormented himself and her—knew how not merely to hurt and humiliate her
deliberately, but to show her that she was always to blame for everything. Of
late he had exhibited a new trait that tormented Princess Mary more than
anything else; this was his ever-increasing intimacy with Mademoiselle
Bourienne. The idea that at the first moment of receiving the news of his son's
intentions had occurred to him in jest—that if Andrew got married he himself
would marry Bourienne—had evidently pleased him, and latterly he had
persistently, and as it seemed to Princess Mary merely to offend her, shown
special endearments to the companion and expressed his dissatisfaction with
his daughter by demonstrations of love of Bourienne.
One day in Moscow in Princess Mary's presence (she thought her father did it
purposely when she was there) the old prince kissed Mademoiselle
Bourienne's hand and, drawing her to him, embraced her affectionately.
Princess Mary flushed and ran out of the room. A few minutes later
Mademoiselle Bourienne came into Princess Mary's room smiling and making
cheerful remarks in her agreeable voice. Princess Mary hastily wiped away her
tears, went resolutely up to Mademoiselle Bourienne, and evidently
unconscious of what she was doing began shouting in angry haste at the
Frenchwoman, her voice breaking: "It's horrible, vile, inhuman, to take
advantage of the weakness..." She did not finish. "Leave my room," she
exclaimed, and burst into sobs.
Next day the prince did not say a word to his daughter, but she noticed that at
dinner he gave orders that Mademoiselle Bourienne should be served first.
After dinner, when the footman handed coffee and from habit began with the
princess, the prince suddenly grew furious, threw his stick at Philip, and
instantly gave instructions to have him conscripted for the army.
"He doesn't obey... I said it twice... and he doesn't obey! She is the first person
in this house; she's my best friend," cried the prince. "And if you allow
yourself," he screamed in a fury, addressing Princess Mary for the first time,
"to forget yourself again before her as you dared to do yesterday, I will show
you who is master in this house. Go! Don't let me set eyes on you; beg her
pardon!"
Princess Mary asked Mademoiselle Bourienne's pardon, and also her father's
pardon for herself and for Philip the footman, who had begged for her
intervention.
At such moments something like a pride of sacrifice gathered in her soul. And
suddenly that father whom she had judged would look for his spectacles in her
presence, fumbling near them and not seeing them, or would forget something
that had just occurred, or take a false step with his failing legs and turn to see
if anyone had noticed his feebleness, or, worst of all, at dinner when there
were no visitors to excite him would suddenly fall asleep, letting his napkin
drop and his shaking head sink over his plate. "He is old and feeble, and I dare
to condemn him!" she thought at such moments, with a feeling of revulsion
against herself.
CHAPTER III
In 1811 there was living in Moscow a French doctor—Metivier—who had
rapidly become the fashion. He was enormously tall, handsome, amiable as
Frenchmen are, and was, as all Moscow said, an extraordinarily clever doctor.
He was received in the best houses not merely as a doctor, but as an equal.
Prince Nicholas had always ridiculed medicine, but latterly on Mademoiselle
Bourienne's advice had allowed this doctor to visit him and had grown
accustomed to him. Metivier came to see the prince about twice a week.
On December 6—St. Nicholas' Day and the prince's name day—all Moscow
came to the prince's front door but he gave orders to admit no one and to invite
to dinner only a small number, a list of whom he gave to Princess Mary.
Metivier, who came in the morning with his felicitations, considered it proper
in his quality of doctor de forcer la consigne, * as he told Princess Mary, and
went in to see the prince. It happened that on that morning of his name day the
prince was in one of his worst moods. He had been going about the house all
the morning finding fault with everyone and pretending not to understand
what was said to him and not to be understood himself. Princess Mary well
knew this mood of quiet absorbed querulousness, which generally culminated
in a burst of rage, and she went about all that morning as though facing a
cocked and loaded gun and awaited the inevitable explosion. Until the doctor's
arrival the morning had passed off safely. After admitting the doctor, Princess
Mary sat down with a book in the drawing room near the door through which
she could hear all that passed in the study.
* To force the guard.
At first she heard only Metivier's voice, then her father's, then both voices
began speaking at the same time, the door was flung open, and on the
threshold appeared the handsome figure of the terrified Metivier with his
shock of black hair, and the prince in his dressing gown and fez, his face
distorted with fury and the pupils of his eyes rolled downwards.
"You don't understand?" shouted the prince, "but I do! French spy, slave of
Buonaparte, spy, get out of my house! Be off, I tell you..."
Metivier, shrugging his shoulders, went up to Mademoiselle Bourienne who at
the sound of shouting had run in from an adjoining room.
"The prince is not very well: bile and rush of blood to the head. Keep calm, I
will call again tomorrow," said Metivier; and putting his fingers to his lips he
hastened away.
Through the study door came the sound of slippered feet and the cry: "Spies,
traitors, traitors everywhere! Not a moment's peace in my own house!"
After Metivier's departure the old prince called his daughter in, and the whole
weight of his wrath fell on her. She was to blame that a spy had been admitted.
Had he not told her, yes, told her to make a list, and not to admit anyone who
was not on that list? Then why was that scoundrel admitted? She was the
cause of it all. With her, he said, he could not have a moment's peace and
could not die quietly.
"No, ma'am! We must part, we must part! Understand that, understand it! I
cannot endure any more," he said, and left the room. Then, as if afraid she
might find some means of consolation, he returned and trying to appear calm
added: "And don't imagine I have said this in a moment of anger. I am calm. I
have thought it over, and it will be carried out—we must part; so find some
place for yourself...." But he could not restrain himself and with the virulence
of which only one who loves is capable, evidently suffering himself, he shook
his fists at her and screamed:
"If only some fool would marry her!" Then he slammed the door, sent for
Mademoiselle Bourienne, and subsided into his study.
At two o'clock the six chosen guests assembled for dinner.
These guests—the famous Count Rostopchin, Prince Lopukhin with his
nephew, General Chatrov an old war comrade of the prince's, and of the
younger generation Pierre and Boris Drubetskoy—awaited the prince in the
drawing room.
Boris, who had come to Moscow on leave a few days before, had been anxious
to be presented to Prince Nicholas Bolkonski, and had contrived to ingratiate
himself so well that the old prince in his case made an exception to the rule of
not receiving bachelors in his house.
The prince's house did not belong to what is known as fashionable society, but
his little circle—though not much talked about in town—was one it was more
flattering to be received in than any other. Boris had realized this the week
before when the commander-in-chief in his presence invited Rostopchin to
dinner on St. Nicholas' Day, and Rostopchin had replied that he could not
come:
"On that day I always go to pay my devotions to the relics of Prince Nicholas
Bolkonski."
"Oh, yes, yes!" replied the commander-in-chief. "How is he?..."
The small group that assembled before dinner in the lofty old-fashioned
drawing room with its old furniture resembled the solemn gathering of a court
of justice. All were silent or talked in low tones. Prince Nicholas came in
serious and taciturn. Princess Mary seemed even quieter and more diffident
than usual. The guests were reluctant to address her, feeling that she was in no
mood for their conversation. Count Rostopchin alone kept the conversation
going, now relating the latest town news, and now the latest political gossip.
Lopukhin and the old general occasionally took part in the conversation.
Prince Bolkonski listened as a presiding judge receives a report, only now and
then, silently or by a brief word, showing that he took heed of what was being
reported to him. The tone of the conversation was such as indicated that no
one approved of what was being done in the political world. Incidents were
related evidently confirming the opinion that everything was going from bad
to worse, but whether telling a story or giving an opinion the speaker always
stopped, or was stopped, at the point beyond which his criticism might touch
the sovereign himself.
At dinner the talk turned on the latest political news: Napoleon's seizure of the
Duke of Oldenburg's territory, and the Russian Note, hostile to Napoleon,
which had been sent to all the European courts.
"Bonaparte treats Europe as a pirate does a captured vessel," said Count
Rostopchin, repeating a phrase he had uttered several times before. "One only
wonders at the long-suffering or blindness of the crowned heads. Now the
Pope's turn has come and Bonaparte doesn't scruple to depose the head of the
Catholic Church—yet all keep silent! Our sovereign alone has protested
against the seizure of the Duke of Oldenburg's territory, and even..." Count
Rostopchin paused, feeling that he had reached the limit beyond which
censure was impossible.
"Other territories have been offered in exchange for the Duchy of Oldenburg,"
said Prince Bolkonski. "He shifts the Dukes about as I might move my serfs
from Bald Hills to Bogucharovo or my Ryazan estates."
"The Duke of Oldenburg bears his misfortunes with admirable strength of
character and resignation," remarked Boris, joining in respectfully.
He said this because on his journey from Petersburg he had had the honor of
being presented to the Duke. Prince Bolkonski glanced at the young man as if
about to say something in reply, but changed his mind, evidently considering
him too young.
"I have read our protests about the Oldenburg affair and was surprised how
badly the Note was worded," remarked Count Rostopchin in the casual tone of
a man dealing with a subject quite familiar to him.
Pierre looked at Rostopchin with naive astonishment, not understanding why
he should be disturbed by the bad composition of the Note.
"Does it matter, Count, how the Note is worded," he asked, "so long as its
substance is forcible?"
"My dear fellow, with our five hundred thousand troops it should be easy to
have a good style," returned Count Rostopchin.
Pierre now understood the count's dissatisfaction with the wording of the
Note.
"One would have thought quill drivers enough had sprung up," remarked the
old prince. "There in Petersburg they are always writing—not notes only but
even new laws. My Andrew there has written a whole volume of laws for
Russia. Nowadays they are always writing!" and he laughed unnaturally.
There was a momentary pause in the conversation; the old general cleared his
throat to draw attention.
"Did you hear of the last event at the review in Petersburg? The figure cut by
the new French ambassador."
"Eh? Yes, I heard something: he said something awkward in His Majesty's
presence."
"His Majesty drew attention to the Grenadier division and to the march past,"
continued the general, "and it seems the ambassador took no notice and
allowed himself to reply that: 'We in France pay no attention to such trifles!'
The Emperor did not condescend to reply. At the next review, they say, the
Emperor did not once deign to address him."
All were silent. On this fact relating to the Emperor personally, it was
impossible to pass any judgment.
"Impudent fellows!" said the prince. "You know Metivier? I turned him out of
my house this morning. He was here; they admitted him in spite of my request
that they should let no one in," he went on, glancing angrily at his daughter.
And he narrated his whole conversation with the French doctor and the
reasons that convinced him that Metivier was a spy. Though these reasons
were very insufficient and obscure, no one made any rejoinder.
After the roast, champagne was served. The guests rose to congratulate the old
prince. Princess Mary, too, went round to him.
He gave her a cold, angry look and offered her his wrinkled, clean-shaven
cheek to kiss. The whole expression of his face told her that he had not
forgotten the morning's talk, that his decision remained in force, and only the
presence of visitors hindered his speaking of it to her now.
When they went into the drawing room where coffee was served, the old men
sat together.
Prince Nicholas grew more animated and expressed his views on the
impending war.
He said that our wars with Bonaparte would be disastrous so long as we
sought alliances with the Germans and thrust ourselves into European affairs,
into which we had been drawn by the Peace of Tilsit. "We ought not to fight
either for or against Austria. Our political interests are all in the East, and in
regard to Bonaparte the only thing is to have an armed frontier and a firm
policy, and he will never dare to cross the Russian frontier, as was the case in
1807!"
"How can we fight the French, Prince?" said Count Rostopchin. "Can we arm
ourselves against our teachers and divinities? Look at our youths, look at our
ladies! The French are our Gods: Paris is our Kingdom of Heaven."
He began speaking louder, evidently to be heard by everyone.
"French dresses, French ideas, French feelings! There now, you turned
Metivier out by the scruff of his neck because he is a Frenchman and a
scoundrel, but our ladies crawl after him on their knees. I went to a party last
night, and there out of five ladies three were Roman Catholics and had the
Pope's indulgence for doing woolwork on Sundays. And they themselves sit
there nearly naked, like the signboards at our Public Baths if I may say so. Ah,
when one looks at our young people, Prince, one would like to take Peter the
Great's old cudgel out of the museum and belabor them in the Russian way till
all the nonsense jumps out of them."
All were silent. The old prince looked at Rostopchin with a smile and wagged
his head approvingly.
"Well, good-by, your excellency, keep well!" said Rostopchin, getting up with
characteristic briskness and holding out his hand to the prince.
"Good-bye, my dear fellow.... His words are music, I never tire of hearing
him!" said the old prince, keeping hold of the hand and offering his cheek to
be kissed.
Following Rostopchin's example the others also rose.
CHAPTER IV
Princess Mary as she sat listening to the old men's talk and faultfinding,
understood nothing of what she heard; she only wondered whether the guests
had all observed her father's hostile attitude toward her. She did not even
notice the special attentions and amiabilities shown her during dinner by Boris
Drubetskoy, who was visiting them for the third time already.
Princess Mary turned with absent-minded questioning look to Pierre, who hat
in hand and with a smile on his face was the last of the guests to approach her
after the old prince had gone out and they were left alone in the drawing room.
"May I stay a little longer?" he said, letting his stout body sink into an
armchair beside her.
"Oh yes," she answered. "You noticed nothing?" her look asked.
Pierre was in an agreeable after-dinner mood. He looked straight before him
and smiled quietly.
"Have you known that young man long, Princess?" he asked.
"Who?"
"Drubetskoy."
"No, not long..."
"Do you like him?"
"Yes, he is an agreeable young man.... Why do you ask me that?" said Princess
Mary, still thinking of that morning's conversation with her father.
"Because I have noticed that when a young man comes on leave from
Petersburg to Moscow it is usually with the object of marrying an heiress."
"You have observed that?" said Princess Mary.
"Yes," returned Pierre with a smile, "and this young man now manages matters
so that where there is a wealthy heiress there he is too. I can read him like a
book. At present he is hesitating whom to lay siege to—you or Mademoiselle
Julie Karagina. He is very attentive to her."
"He visits them?"
"Yes, very often. And do you know the new way of courting?" said Pierre with
an amused smile, evidently in that cheerful mood of good humored raillery for
which he so often reproached himself in his diary.
"No," replied Princess Mary.
"To please Moscow girls nowadays one has to be melancholy. He is very
melancholy with Mademoiselle Karagina," said Pierre.
"Really?" asked Princess Mary, looking into Pierre's kindly face and still
thinking of her own sorrow. "It would be a relief," thought she, "if I ventured
to confide what I am feeling to someone. I should like to tell everything to
Pierre. He is kind and generous. It would be a relief. He would give me
advice."
"Would you marry him?"
"Oh, my God, Count, there are moments when I would marry anybody!" she
cried suddenly to her own surprise and with tears in her voice. "Ah, how bitter
it is to love someone near to you and to feel that..." she went on in a trembling
voice, "that you can do nothing for him but grieve him, and to know that you
cannot alter this. Then there is only one thing left—to go away, but where
could I go?"
"What is wrong? What is it, Princess?"
But without finishing what she was saying, Princess Mary burst into tears.
"I don't know what is the matter with me today. Don't take any notice—forget
what I have said!"
Pierre's gaiety vanished completely. He anxiously questioned the princess,
asked her to speak out fully and confide her grief to him; but she only repeated
that she begged him to forget what she had said, that she did not remember
what she had said, and that she had no trouble except the one he knew of—that
Prince Andrew's marriage threatened to cause a rupture between father and
son.
"Have you any news of the Rostovs?" she asked, to change the subject. "I was
told they are coming soon. I am also expecting Andrew any day. I should like
them to meet here."
"And how does he now regard the matter?" asked Pierre, referring to the old
prince.
Princess Mary shook her head.
"What is to be done? In a few months the year will be up. The thing is
impossible. I only wish I could spare my brother the first moments. I wish they
would come sooner. I hope to be friends with her. You have known them a
long time," said Princess Mary. "Tell me honestly the whole truth: what sort of
girl is she, and what do you think of her?—The real truth, because you know
Andrew is risking so much doing this against his father's will that I should like
to know..."
An undefined instinct told Pierre that these explanations, and repeated requests
to be told the whole truth, expressed ill-will on the princess' part toward her
future sister-in-law and a wish that he should disapprove of Andrew's choice;
but in reply he said what he felt rather than what he thought.
"I don't know how to answer your question," he said, blushing without
knowing why. "I really don't know what sort of girl she is; I can't analyze her
at all. She is enchanting, but what makes her so I don't know. That is all one
can say about her."
Princess Mary sighed, and the expression on her face said: "Yes, that's what I
expected and feared."
"Is she clever?" she asked.
Pierre considered.
"I think not," he said, "and yet—yes. She does not deign to be clever.... Oh no,
she is simply enchanting, and that is all."
Princess Mary again shook her head disapprovingly.
"Ah, I so long to like her! Tell her so if you see her before I do."
"I hear they are expected very soon," said Pierre.
Princess Mary told Pierre of her plan to become intimate with her future sister-
in-law as soon as the Rostovs arrived and to try to accustom the old prince to
her.
CHAPTER V
Boris had not succeeded in making a wealthy match in Petersburg, so with the
same object in view he came to Moscow. There he wavered between the two
richest heiresses, Julie and Princess Mary. Though Princess Mary despite her
plainness seemed to him more attractive than Julie, he, without knowing why,
felt awkward about paying court to her. When they had last met on the old
prince's name day, she had answered at random all his attempts to talk
sentimentally, evidently not listening to what he was saying.
Julie on the contrary accepted his attentions readily, though in a manner
peculiar to herself.
She was twenty-seven. After the death of her brothers she had become very
wealthy. She was by now decidedly plain, but thought herself not merely as
good-looking as before but even far more attractive. She was confirmed in this
delusion by the fact that she had become a very wealthy heiress and also by
the fact that the older she grew the less dangerous she became to men, and the
more freely they could associate with her and avail themselves of her suppers,
soirees, and the animated company that assembled at her house, without
incurring any obligation. A man who would have been afraid ten years before
of going every day to the house when there was a girl of seventeen there, for
fear of compromising her and committing himself, would now go boldly every
day and treat her not as a marriageable girl but as a sexless acquaintance.
That winter the Karagins' house was the most agreeable and hospitable in
Moscow. In addition to the formal evening and dinner parties, a large
company, chiefly of men, gathered there every day, supping at midnight and
staying till three in the morning. Julie never missed a ball, a promenade, or a
play. Her dresses were always of the latest fashion. But in spite of that she
seemed to be disillusioned about everything and told everyone that she did not
believe either in friendship or in love, or any of the joys of life, and expected
peace only "yonder." She adopted the tone of one who has suffered a great
disappointment, like a girl who has either lost the man she loved or been
cruelly deceived by him. Though nothing of the kind had happened to her she
was regarded in that light, and had even herself come to believe that she had
suffered much in life. This melancholy, which did not prevent her amusing
herself, did not hinder the young people who came to her house from passing
the time pleasantly. Every visitor who came to the house paid his tribute to the
melancholy mood of the hostess, and then amused himself with society gossip,
dancing, intellectual games, and bouts rimes, which were in vogue at the
Karagins'. Only a few of these young men, among them Boris, entered more
deeply into Julie's melancholy, and with these she had prolonged
conversations in private on the vanity of all worldly things, and to them she
showed her albums filled with mournful sketches, maxims, and verses.
To Boris, Julie was particularly gracious: she regretted his early
disillusionment with life, offered him such consolation of friendship as she
who had herself suffered so much could render, and showed him her album.
Boris sketched two trees in the album and wrote: "Rustic trees, your dark
branches shed gloom and melancholy upon me."
On another page he drew a tomb, and wrote:
La mort est secourable et la mort est tranquille.
Ah! contre les douleurs il n'y a pas d'autre asile. *
* Death gives relief and death is peaceful.
Ah! from suffering there is no other refuge.
Julie said this was charming
"There is something so enchanting in the smile of melancholy," she said to
Boris, repeating word for word a passage she had copied from a book. "It is a
ray of light in the darkness, a shade between sadness and despair, showing the
possibility of consolation."
In reply Boris wrote these lines:
Aliment de poison d'une ame trop sensible,
Toi, sans qui le bonheur me serait impossible,
Tendre melancholie, ah, viens me consoler,
Viens calmer les tourments de ma sombre retraite,
Et mele une douceur secrete
A ces pleurs que je sens couler. *
*Poisonous nourishment of a too sensitive soul,
Thou, without whom happiness would for me be impossible,
Tender melancholy, ah, come to console me,
Come to calm the torments of my gloomy retreat,
And mingle a secret sweetness
With these tears that I feel to be flowing.
For Boris, Julie played most doleful nocturnes on her harp. Boris read 'Poor
Liza' aloud to her, and more than once interrupted the reading because of the
emotions that choked him. Meeting at large gatherings Julie and Boris looked
on one another as the only souls who understood one another in a world of
indifferent people.
Anna Mikhaylovna, who often visited the Karagins, while playing cards with
the mother made careful inquiries as to Julie's dowry (she was to have two
estates in Penza and the Nizhegorod forests). Anna Mikhaylovna regarded the
refined sadness that united her son to the wealthy Julie with emotion, and
resignation to the Divine will.
"You are always charming and melancholy, my dear Julie," she said to the
daughter. "Boris says his soul finds repose at your house. He has suffered so
many disappointments and is so sensitive," said she to the mother. "Ah, my
dear, I can't tell you how fond I have grown of Julie latterly," she said to her
son. "But who could help loving her? She is an angelic being! Ah, Boris,
Boris!"—she paused. "And how I pity her mother," she went on; "today she
showed me her accounts and letters from Penza (they have enormous estates
there), and she, poor thing, has no one to help her, and they do cheat her so!"
Boris smiled almost imperceptibly while listening to his mother. He laughed
blandly at her naive diplomacy but listened to what she had to say, and
sometimes questioned her carefully about the Penza and Nizhegorod estates.
Julie had long been expecting a proposal from her melancholy adorer and was
ready to accept it; but some secret feeling of repulsion for her, for her
passionate desire to get married, for her artificiality, and a feeling of horror at
renouncing the possibility of real love still restrained Boris. His leave was
expiring. He spent every day and whole days at the Karagins', and every day
on thinking the matter over told himself that he would propose tomorrow. But
in Julie's presence, looking at her red face and chin (nearly always powdered),
her moist eyes, and her expression of continual readiness to pass at once from
melancholy to an unnatural rapture of married bliss, Boris could not utter the
decisive words, though in imagination he had long regarded himself as the
possessor of those Penza and Nizhegorod estates and had apportioned the use
of the income from them. Julie saw Boris' indecision, and sometimes the
thought occurred to her that she was repulsive to him, but her feminine self-
deception immediately supplied her with consolation, and she told herself that
he was only shy from love. Her melancholy, however, began to turn to
irritability, and not long before Boris' departure she formed a definite plan of
action. Just as Boris' leave of absence was expiring, Anatole Kuragin made his
appearance in Moscow, and of course in the Karagins' drawing room, and
Julie, suddenly abandoning her melancholy, became cheerful and very
attentive to Kuragin.
"My dear," said Anna Mikhaylovna to her son, "I know from a reliable source
that Prince Vasili has sent his son to Moscow to get him married to Julie. I am
so fond of Julie that I should be sorry for her. What do you think of it, my
dear?"
The idea of being made a fool of and of having thrown away that whole month
of arduous melancholy service to Julie, and of seeing all the revenue from the
Penza estates which he had already mentally apportioned and put to proper use
fall into the hands of another, and especially into the hands of that idiot
Anatole, pained Boris. He drove to the Karagins' with the firm intention of
proposing. Julie met him in a gay, careless manner, spoke casually of how she
had enjoyed yesterday's ball, and asked when he was leaving. Though Boris
had come intentionally to speak of his love and therefore meant to be tender,
he began speaking irritably of feminine inconstancy, of how easily women can
turn from sadness to joy, and how their moods depend solely on who happens
to be paying court to them. Julie was offended and replied that it was true that
a woman needs variety, and the same thing over and over again would weary
anyone.
"Then I should advise you..." Boris began, wishing to sting her; but at that
instant the galling thought occurred to him that he might have to leave
Moscow without having accomplished his aim, and have vainly wasted his
efforts—which was a thing he never allowed to happen.
He checked himself in the middle of the sentence, lowered his eyes to avoid
seeing her unpleasantly irritated and irresolute face, and said:
"I did not come here at all to quarrel with you. On the contrary..."
He glanced at her to make sure that he might go on. Her irritability had
suddenly quite vanished, and her anxious, imploring eyes were fixed on him
with greedy expectation. "I can always arrange so as not to see her often,"
thought Boris. "The affair has been begun and must be finished!" He blushed
hotly, raised his eyes to hers, and said:
"You know my feelings for you!"
There was no need to say more: Julie's face shone with triumph and self-
satisfaction; but she forced Boris to say all that is said on such occasions—that
he loved her and had never loved any other woman more than her. She knew
that for the Penza estates and Nizhegorod forests she could demand this, and
she received what she demanded.
The affianced couple, no longer alluding to trees that shed gloom and
melancholy upon them, planned the arrangements of a splendid house in
Petersburg, paid calls, and prepared everything for a brilliant wedding.
CHAPTER VI
At the end of January old Count Rostov went to Moscow with Natasha and
Sonya. The countess was still unwell and unable to travel but it was
impossible to wait for her recovery. Prince Andrew was expected in Moscow
any day, the trousseau had to be ordered and the estate near Moscow had to be
sold, besides which the opportunity of presenting his future daughter-in-law to
old Prince Bolkonski while he was in Moscow could not be missed. The
Rostovs' Moscow house had not been heated that winter and, as they had come
only for a short time and the countess was not with them, the count decided to
stay with Marya Dmitrievna Akhrosimova, who had long been pressing her
hospitality on them.
Late one evening the Rostovs' four sleighs drove into Marya Dmitrievna's
courtyard in the old Konyusheny street. Marya Dmitrievna lived alone. She
had already married off her daughter, and her sons were all in the service.
She held herself as erect, told everyone her opinion as candidly, loudly, and
bluntly as ever, and her whole bearing seemed a reproach to others for any
weakness, passion, or temptation—the possibility of which she did not admit.
From early in the morning, wearing a dressing jacket, she attended to her
household affairs, and then she drove out: on holy days to church and after the
service to jails and prisons on affairs of which she never spoke to anyone. On
ordinary days, after dressing, she received petitioners of various classes, of
whom there were always some. Then she had dinner, a substantial and
appetizing meal at which there were always three or four guests; after dinner
she played a game of boston, and at night she had the newspapers or a new
book read to her while she knitted. She rarely made an exception and went out
to pay visits, and then only to the most important persons in the town.
She had not yet gone to bed when the Rostovs arrived and the pulley of the
hall door squeaked from the cold as it let in the Rostovs and their servants.
Marya Dmitrievna, with her spectacles hanging down on her nose and her
head flung back, stood in the hall doorway looking with a stern, grim face at
the new arrivals. One might have thought she was angry with the travelers and
would immediately turn them out, had she not at the same time been giving
careful instructions to the servants for the accommodation of the visitors and
their belongings.
"The count's things? Bring them here," she said, pointing to the portmanteaus
and not greeting anyone. "The young ladies'? There to the left. Now what are
you dawdling for?" she cried to the maids. "Get the samovar ready!... You've
grown plumper and prettier," she remarked, drawing Natasha (whose cheeks
were glowing from the cold) to her by the hood. "Foo! You are cold! Now take
off your things, quick!" she shouted to the count who was going to kiss her
hand. "You're half frozen, I'm sure! Bring some rum for tea!... Bonjour, Sonya
dear!" she added, turning to Sonya and indicating by this French greeting her
slightly contemptuous though affectionate attitude toward her.
When they came in to tea, having taken off their outdoor things and tidied
themselves up after their journey, Marya Dmitrievna kissed them all in due
order.
"I'm heartily glad you have come and are staying with me. It was high time,"
she said, giving Natasha a significant look. "The old man is here and his son's
expected any day. You'll have to make his acquaintance. But we'll speak of
that later on," she added, glancing at Sonya with a look that showed she did
not want to speak of it in her presence. "Now listen," she said to the count.
"What do you want tomorrow? Whom will you send for? Shinshin?" she
crooked one of her fingers. "The sniveling Anna Mikhaylovna? That's two.
She's here with her son. The son is getting married! Then Bezukhov, eh? He is
here too, with his wife. He ran away from her and she came galloping after
him. He dined with me on Wednesday. As for them"—and she pointed to the
girls—"tomorrow I'll take them first to the Iberian shrine of the Mother of
God, and then we'll drive to the Super-Rogue's. I suppose you'll have
everything new. Don't judge by me: sleeves nowadays are this size! The other
day young Princess Irina Vasilevna came to see me; she was an awful sight—
looked as if she had put two barrels on her arms. You know not a day passes
now without some new fashion.... And what have you to do yourself?" she
asked the count sternly.
"One thing has come on top of another: her rags to buy, and now a purchaser
has turned up for the Moscow estate and for the house. If you will be so kind,
I'll fix a time and go down to the estate just for a day, and leave my lassies
with you."
"All right. All right. They'll be safe with me, as safe as in Chancery! I'll take
them where they must go, scold them a bit, and pet them a bit," said Marya
Dmitrievna, touching her goddaughter and favorite, Natasha, on the cheek
with her large hand.
Next morning Marya Dmitrievna took the young ladies to the Iberian shrine of
the Mother of God and to Madame Suppert-Roguet, who was so afraid of
Marya Dmitrievna that she always let her have costumes at a loss merely to
get rid of her. Marya Dmitrievna ordered almost the whole trousseau. When
they got home she turned everybody out of the room except Natasha, and then
called her pet to her armchair.
"Well, now we'll talk. I congratulate you on your betrothed. You've hooked a
fine fellow! I am glad for your sake and I've known him since he was so high."
She held her hand a couple of feet from the ground. Natasha blushed happily.
"I like him and all his family. Now listen! You know that old Prince Nicholas
much dislikes his son's marrying. The old fellow's crotchety! Of course Prince
Andrew is not a child and can shift without him, but it's not nice to enter a
family against a father's will. One wants to do it peacefully and lovingly.
You're a clever girl and you'll know how to manage. Be kind, and use your
wits. Then all will be well."
Natasha remained silent, from shyness Marya Dmitrievna supposed, but really
because she disliked anyone interfering in what touched her love of Prince
Andrew, which seemed to her so apart from all human affairs that no one
could understand it. She loved and knew Prince Andrew, he loved her only,
and was to come one of these days and take her. She wanted nothing more.
"You see I have known him a long time and am also fond of Mary, your future
sister-in-law. 'Husbands' sisters bring up blisters,' but this one wouldn't hurt a
fly. She has asked me to bring you two together. Tomorrow you'll go with your
father to see her. Be very nice and affectionate to her: you're younger than she.
When he comes, he'll find you already know his sister and father and are liked
by them. Am I right or not? Won't that be best?"
"Yes, it will," Natasha answered reluctantly.
CHAPTER VII
Next day, by Marya Dmitrievna's advice, Count Rostov took Natasha to call
on Prince Nicholas Bolkonski. The count did not set out cheerfully on this
visit, at heart he felt afraid. He well remembered the last interview he had had
with the old prince at the time of the enrollment, when in reply to an invitation
to dinner he had had to listen to an angry reprimand for not having provided
his full quota of men. Natasha, on the other hand, having put on her best
gown, was in the highest spirits. "They can't help liking me," she thought.
"Everybody always has liked me, and I am so willing to do anything they
wish, so ready to be fond of him—for being his father—and of her—for being
his sister—that there is no reason for them not to like me..."
They drove up to the gloomy old house on the Vozdvizhenka and entered the
vestibule.
"Well, the Lord have mercy on us!" said the count, half in jest, half in earnest;
but Natasha noticed that her father was flurried on entering the anteroom and
inquired timidly and softly whether the prince and princess were at home.
When they had been announced a perturbation was noticeable among the
servants. The footman who had gone to announce them was stopped by
another in the large hall and they whispered to one another. Then a
maidservant ran into the hall and hurriedly said something, mentioning the
princess. At last an old, cross looking footman came and announced to the
Rostovs that the prince was not receiving, but that the princess begged them to
walk up. The first person who came to meet the visitors was Mademoiselle
Bourienne. She greeted the father and daughter with special politeness and
showed them to the princess' room. The princess, looking excited and nervous,
her face flushed in patches, ran in to meet the visitors, treading heavily, and
vainly trying to appear cordial and at ease. From the first glance Princess Mary
did not like Natasha. She thought her too fashionably dressed, frivolously gay
and vain. She did not at all realize that before having seen her future sister-in-
law she was prejudiced against her by involuntary envy of her beauty, youth,
and happiness, as well as by jealousy of her brother's love for her. Apart from
this insuperable antipathy to her, Princess Mary was agitated just then because
on the Rostovs' being announced, the old prince had shouted that he did not
wish to see them, that Princess Mary might do so if she chose, but they were
not to be admitted to him. She had decided to receive them, but feared lest the
prince might at any moment indulge in some freak, as he seemed much upset
by the Rostovs' visit.
"There, my dear princess, I've brought you my songstress," said the count,
bowing and looking round uneasily as if afraid the old prince might appear. "I
am so glad you should get to know one another... very sorry the prince is still
ailing," and after a few more commonplace remarks he rose. "If you'll allow
me to leave my Natasha in your hands for a quarter of an hour, Princess, I'll
drive round to see Anna Semenovna, it's quite near in the Dogs' Square, and
then I'll come back for her."
The count had devised this diplomatic ruse (as he afterwards told his daughter)
to give the future sisters-in-law an opportunity to talk to one another freely,
but another motive was to avoid the danger of encountering the old prince, of
whom he was afraid. He did not mention this to his daughter, but Natasha
noticed her father's nervousness and anxiety and felt mortified by it. She
blushed for him, grew still angrier at having blushed, and looked at the
princess with a bold and defiant expression which said that she was not afraid
of anybody. The princess told the count that she would be delighted, and only
begged him to stay longer at Anna Semenovna's, and he departed.
Despite the uneasy glances thrown at her by Princess Mary—who wished to
have a tête-à-tête with Natasha—Mademoiselle Bourienne remained in the
room and persistently talked about Moscow amusements and theaters. Natasha
felt offended by the hesitation she had noticed in the anteroom, by her father's
nervousness, and by the unnatural manner of the princess who—she thought—
was making a favor of receiving her, and so everything displeased her. She did
not like Princess Mary, whom she thought very plain, affected, and dry.
Natasha suddenly shrank into herself and involuntarily assumed an offhand air
which alienated Princess Mary still more. After five minutes of irksome,
constrained conversation, they heard the sound of slippered feet rapidly
approaching. Princess Mary looked frightened.
The door opened and the old prince, in a dressing gown and a white nightcap,
came in.
"Ah, madam!" he began. "Madam, Countess... Countess Rostova, if I am not
mistaken... I beg you to excuse me, to excuse me... I did not know, madam.
God is my witness, I did not know you had honored us with a visit, and I came
in such a costume only to see my daughter. I beg you to excuse me... God is
my witness, I didn't know-" he repeated, stressing the word "God" so
unnaturally and so unpleasantly that Princess Mary stood with downcast eyes
not daring to look either at her father or at Natasha.
Nor did the latter, having risen and curtsied, know what to do. Mademoiselle
Bourienne alone smiled agreeably.
"I beg you to excuse me, excuse me! God is my witness, I did not know,"
muttered the old man, and after looking Natasha over from head to foot he
went out.
Mademoiselle Bourienne was the first to recover herself after this apparition
and began speaking about the prince's indisposition. Natasha and Princess
Mary looked at one another in silence, and the longer they did so without
saying what they wanted to say, the greater grew their antipathy to one
another.
When the count returned, Natasha was impolitely pleased and hastened to get
away: at that moment she hated the stiff, elderly princess, who could place her
in such an embarrassing position and had spent half an hour with her without
once mentioning Prince Andrew. "I couldn't begin talking about him in the
presence of that Frenchwoman," thought Natasha. The same thought was
meanwhile tormenting Princess Mary. She knew what she ought to have said
to Natasha, but she had been unable to say it because Mademoiselle Bourienne
was in the way, and because, without knowing why, she felt it very difficult to
speak of the marriage. When the count was already leaving the room, Princess
Mary went up hurriedly to Natasha, took her by the hand, and said with a deep
sigh:
"Wait, I must..."
Natasha glanced at her ironically without knowing why.
"Dear Natalie," said Princess Mary, "I want you to know that I am glad my
brother has found happiness...."
She paused, feeling that she was not telling the truth. Natasha noticed this and
guessed its reason.
"I think, Princess, it is not convenient to speak of that now," she said with
external dignity and coldness, though she felt the tears choking her.
"What have I said and what have I done?" thought she, as soon as she was out
of the room.
They waited a long time for Natasha to come to dinner that day. She sat in her
room crying like a child, blowing her nose and sobbing. Sonya stood beside
her, kissing her hair.
"Natasha, what is it about?" she asked. "What do they matter to you? It will all
pass, Natasha."
"But if you only knew how offensive it was... as if I..."
"Don't talk about it, Natasha. It wasn't your fault so why should you mind?
Kiss me," said Sonya.
Natasha raised her head and, kissing her friend on the lips, pressed her wet
face against her.
"I can't tell you, I don't know. No one's to blame," said Natasha—"It's my
fault. But it all hurts terribly. Oh, why doesn't he come?..."
She came in to dinner with red eyes. Marya Dmitrievna, who knew how the
prince had received the Rostovs, pretended not to notice how upset Natasha
was and jested resolutely and loudly at table with the count and the other
guests.
CHAPTER VIII
That evening the Rostovs went to the Opera, for which Marya Dmitrievna had
taken a box.
Natasha did not want to go, but could not refuse Marya Dmitrievna's kind
offer which was intended expressly for her. When she came ready dressed into
the ballroom to await her father, and looking in the large mirror there saw that
she was pretty, very pretty, she felt even more sad, but it was a sweet, tender
sadness.
"O God, if he were here now I would not behave as I did then, but differently.
I would not be silly and afraid of things, I would simply embrace him, cling to
him, and make him look at me with those searching inquiring eyes with which
he has so often looked at me, and then I would make him laugh as he used to
laugh. And his eyes—how I see those eyes!" thought Natasha. "And what do
his father and sister matter to me? I love him alone, him, him, with that face
and those eyes, with his smile, manly and yet childlike.... No, I had better not
think of him; not think of him but forget him, quite forget him for the present.
I can't bear this waiting and I shall cry in a minute!" and she turned away from
the glass, making an effort not to cry. "And how can Sonya love Nicholas so
calmly and quietly and wait so long and so patiently?" thought she, looking at
Sonya, who also came in quite ready, with a fan in her hand. "No, she's
altogether different. I can't!"
Natasha at that moment felt so softened and tender that it was not enough for
her to love and know she was beloved, she wanted now, at once, to embrace
the man she loved, to speak and hear from him words of love such as filled her
heart. While she sat in the carriage beside her father, pensively watching the
lights of the street lamps flickering on the frozen window, she felt still sadder
and more in love, and forgot where she was going and with whom. Having
fallen into the line of carriages, the Rostovs' carriage drove up to the theater,
its wheels squeaking over the snow. Natasha and Sonya, holding up their
dresses, jumped out quickly. The count got out helped by the footmen, and,
passing among men and women who were entering and the program sellers,
they all three went along the corridor to the first row of boxes. Through the
closed doors the music was already audible.
"Natasha, your hair!..." whispered Sonya.
An attendant deferentially and quickly slipped before the ladies and opened
the door of their box. The music sounded louder and through the door rows of
brightly lit boxes in which ladies sat with bare arms and shoulders, and noisy
stalls brilliant with uniforms, glittered before their eyes. A lady entering the
next box shot a glance of feminine envy at Natasha. The curtain had not yet
risen and the overture was being played. Natasha, smoothing her gown, went
in with Sonya and sat down, scanning the brilliant tiers of boxes opposite. A
sensation she had not experienced for a long time—that of hundreds of eyes
looking at her bare arms and neck—suddenly affected her both agreeably and
disagreeably and called up a whole crowd of memories, desires and emotions
associated with that feeling.
The two remarkably pretty girls, Natasha and Sonya, with Count Rostov who
had not been seen in Moscow for a long time, attracted general attention.
Moreover, everybody knew vaguely of Natasha's engagement to Prince
Andrew, and knew that the Rostovs had lived in the country ever since, and all
looked with curiosity at a fiancee who was making one of the best matches in
Russia.
Natasha's looks, as everyone told her, had improved in the country, and that
evening thanks to her agitation she was particularly pretty. She struck those
who saw her by her fullness of life and beauty, combined with her indifference
to everything about her. Her black eyes looked at the crowd without seeking
anyone, and her delicate arm, bare to above the elbow, lay on the velvet edge
of the box, while, evidently unconsciously, she opened and closed her hand in
time to the music, crumpling her program. "Look, there's Alenina," said
Sonya, "with her mother, isn't it?"
"Dear me, Michael Kirilovich has grown still stouter!" remarked the count.
"Look at our Anna Mikhaylovna—what a headdress she has on!"
"The Karagins, Julie—and Boris with them. One can see at once that they're
engaged...."
"Drubetskoy has proposed?"
"Oh yes, I heard it today," said Shinshin, coming into the Rostovs' box.
Natasha looked in the direction in which her father's eyes were turned and saw
Julie sitting beside her mother with a happy look on her face and a string of
pearls round her thick red neck—which Natasha knew was covered with
powder. Behind them, wearing a smile and leaning over with an ear to Julie's
mouth, was Boris' handsome smoothly brushed head. He looked at the Rostovs
from under his brows and said something, smiling, to his betrothed.
"They are talking about us, about me and him!" thought Natasha. "And he no
doubt is calming her jealousy of me. They needn't trouble themselves! If only
they knew how little I am concerned about any of them."
Behind them sat Anna Mikhaylovna wearing a green headdress and with a
happy look of resignation to the will of God on her face. Their box was
pervaded by that atmosphere of an affianced couple which Natasha knew so
well and liked so much. She turned away and suddenly remembered all that
had been so humiliating in her morning's visit.
"What right has he not to wish to receive me into his family? Oh, better not
think of it—not till he comes back!" she told herself, and began looking at the
faces, some strange and some familiar, in the stalls. In the front, in the very
center, leaning back against the orchestra rail, stood Dolokhov in a Persian
dress, his curly hair brushed up into a huge shock. He stood in full view of the
audience, well aware that he was attracting everyone's attention, yet as much
at ease as though he were in his own room. Around him thronged Moscow's
most brilliant young men, whom he evidently dominated.
The count, laughing, nudged the blushing Sonya and pointed to her former
adorer.
"Do you recognize him?" said he. "And where has he sprung from?" he asked,
turning to Shinshin. "Didn't he vanish somewhere?"
"He did," replied Shinshin. "He was in the Caucasus and ran away from there.
They say he has been acting as minister to some ruling prince in Persia, where
he killed the Shah's brother. Now all the Moscow ladies are mad about him!
It's 'Dolokhov the Persian' that does it! We never hear a word but Dolokhov is
mentioned. They swear by him, they offer him to you as they would a dish of
choice sterlet. Dolokhov and Anatole Kuragin have turned all our ladies'
heads."
A tall, beautiful woman with a mass of plaited hair and much exposed plump
white shoulders and neck, round which she wore a double string of large
pearls, entered the adjoining box rustling her heavy silk dress and took a long
time settling into her place.
Natasha involuntarily gazed at that neck, those shoulders, and pearls and
coiffure, and admired the beauty of the shoulders and the pearls. While
Natasha was fixing her gaze on her for the second time the lady looked round
and, meeting the count's eyes, nodded to him and smiled. She was the
Countess Bezukhova, Pierre's wife, and the count, who knew everyone in
society, leaned over and spoke to her.
"Have you been here long, Countess?" he inquired. "I'll call, I'll call to kiss
your hand. I'm here on business and have brought my girls with me. They say
Semenova acts marvelously. Count Pierre never used to forget us. Is he here?"
"Yes, he meant to look in," answered Helene, and glanced attentively at
Natasha.
Count Rostov resumed his seat.
"Handsome, isn't she?" he whispered to Natasha.
"Wonderful!" answered Natasha. "She's a woman one could easily fall in love
with."
Just then the last chords of the overture were heard and the conductor tapped
with his stick. Some latecomers took their seats in the stalls, and the curtain
rose.
As soon as it rose everyone in the boxes and stalls became silent, and all the
men, old and young, in uniform and evening dress, and all the women with
gems on their bare flesh, turned their whole attention with eager curiosity to
the stage. Natasha too began to look at it.
CHAPTER IX
The floor of the stage consisted of smooth boards, at the sides was some
painted cardboard representing trees, and at the back was a cloth stretched
over boards. In the center of the stage sat some girls in red bodices and white
skirts. One very fat girl in a white silk dress sat apart on a low bench, to the
back of which a piece of green cardboard was glued. They all sang something.
When they had finished their song the girl in white went up to the prompter's
box and a man with tight silk trousers over his stout legs, and holding a plume
and a dagger, went up to her and began singing, waving his arms about.
First the man in the tight trousers sang alone, then she sang, then they both
paused while the orchestra played and the man fingered the hand of the girl in
white, obviously awaiting the beat to start singing with her. They sang together
and everyone in the theater began clapping and shouting, while the man and
woman on the stage—who represented lovers—began smiling, spreading out
their arms, and bowing.
After her life in the country, and in her present serious mood, all this seemed
grotesque and amazing to Natasha. She could not follow the opera nor even
listen to the music; she saw only the painted cardboard and the queerly dressed
men and women who moved, spoke, and sang so strangely in that brilliant
light. She knew what it was all meant to represent, but it was so pretentiously
false and unnatural that she first felt ashamed for the actors and then amused at
them. She looked at the faces of the audience, seeking in them the same sense
of ridicule and perplexity she herself experienced, but they all seemed
attentive to what was happening on the stage, and expressed delight which to
Natasha seemed feigned. "I suppose it has to be like this!" she thought. She
kept looking round in turn at the rows of pomaded heads in the stalls and then
at the seminude women in the boxes, especially at Helene in the next box, who
—apparently quite unclothed—sat with a quiet tranquil smile, not taking her
eyes off the stage. And feeling the bright light that flooded the whole place
and the warm air heated by the crowd, Natasha little by little began to pass
into a state of intoxication she had not experienced for a long while. She did
not realize who and where she was, nor what was going on before her. As she
looked and thought, the strangest fancies unexpectedly and disconnectedly
passed through her mind: the idea occurred to her of jumping onto the edge of
the box and singing the air the actress was singing, then she wished to touch
with her fan an old gentleman sitting not far from her, then to lean over to
Helene and tickle her.
At a moment when all was quiet before the commencement of a song, a door
leading to the stalls on the side nearest the Rostovs' box creaked, and the steps
of a belated arrival were heard. "There's Kuragin!" whispered Shinshin.
Countess Bezukhova turned smiling to the newcomer, and Natasha, following
the direction of that look, saw an exceptionally handsome adjutant
approaching their box with a self-assured yet courteous bearing. This was
Anatole Kuragin whom she had seen and noticed long ago at the ball in
Petersburg. He was now in an adjutant's uniform with one epaulet and a
shoulder knot. He moved with a restrained swagger which would have been
ridiculous had he not been so good-looking and had his handsome face not
worn such an expression of good-humored complacency and gaiety. Though
the performance was proceeding, he walked deliberately down the carpeted
gangway, his sword and spurs slightly jingling and his handsome perfumed
head held high. Having looked at Natasha he approached his sister, laid his
well gloved hand on the edge of her box, nodded to her, and leaning forward
asked a question, with a motion toward Natasha.
"Mais charmante!" said he, evidently referring to Natasha, who did not exactly
hear his words but understood them from the movement of his lips. Then he
took his place in the first row of the stalls and sat down beside Dolokhov,
nudging with his elbow in a friendly and offhand way that Dolokhov whom
others treated so fawningly. He winked at him gaily, smiled, and rested his
foot against the orchestra screen.
"How like the brother is to the sister," remarked the count. "And how
handsome they both are!"
Shinshin, lowering his voice, began to tell the count of some intrigue of
Kuragin's in Moscow, and Natasha tried to overhear it just because he had said
she was "charmante."
The first act was over. In the stalls everyone began moving about, going out
and coming in.
Boris came to the Rostovs' box, received their congratulations very simply,
and raising his eyebrows with an absent-minded smile conveyed to Natasha
and Sonya his fiancee's invitation to her wedding, and went away. Natasha
with a gay, coquettish smile talked to him, and congratulated on his
approaching wedding that same Boris with whom she had formerly been in
love. In the state of intoxication she was in, everything seemed simple and
natural.
The scantily clad Helene smiled at everyone in the same way, and Natasha
gave Boris a similar smile.
Helene's box was filled and surrounded from the stalls by the most
distinguished and intellectual men, who seemed to vie with one another in
their wish to let everyone see that they knew her.
During the whole of that entr'acte Kuragin stood with Dolokhov in front of the
orchestra partition, looking at the Rostovs' box. Natasha knew he was talking
about her and this afforded her pleasure. She even turned so that he should see
her profile in what she thought was its most becoming aspect. Before the
beginning of the second act Pierre appeared in the stalls. The Rostovs had not
seen him since their arrival. His face looked sad, and he had grown still stouter
since Natasha last saw him. He passed up to the front rows, not noticing
anyone. Anatole went up to him and began speaking to him, looking at and
indicating the Rostovs' box. On seeing Natasha Pierre grew animated and,
hastily passing between the rows, came toward their box. When he got there
he leaned on his elbows and, smiling, talked to her for a long time. While
conversing with Pierre, Natasha heard a man's voice in Countess Bezukhova's
box and something told her it was Kuragin. She turned and their eyes met.
Almost smiling, he gazed straight into her eyes with such an enraptured
caressing look that it seemed strange to be so near him, to look at him like
that, to be so sure he admired her, and not to be acquainted with him.
In the second act there was scenery representing tombstones, there was a
round hole in the canvas to represent the moon, shades were raised over the
footlights, and from horns and contrabass came deep notes while many people
appeared from right and left wearing black cloaks and holding things like
daggers in their hands. They began waving their arms. Then some other people
ran in and began dragging away the maiden who had been in white and was
now in light blue. They did not drag her away at once, but sang with her for a
long time and then at last dragged her off, and behind the scenes something
metallic was struck three times and everyone knelt down and sang a prayer.
All these things were repeatedly interrupted by the enthusiastic shouts of the
audience.
During this act every time Natasha looked toward the stalls she saw Anatole
Kuragin with an arm thrown across the back of his chair, staring at her. She
was pleased to see that he was captivated by her and it did not occur to her that
there was anything wrong in it.
When the second act was over Countess Bezukhova rose, turned to the
Rostovs' box—her whole bosom completely exposed—beckoned the old count
with a gloved finger, and paying no attention to those who had entered her box
began talking to him with an amiable smile.
"Do make me acquainted with your charming daughters," said she. "The
whole town is singing their praises and I don't even know them!"
Natasha rose and curtsied to the splendid countess. She was so pleased by
praise from this brilliant beauty that she blushed with pleasure.
"I want to become a Moscovite too, now," said Helene. "How is it you're not
ashamed to bury such pearls in the country?"
Countess Bezukhova quite deserved her reputation of being a fascinating
woman. She could say what she did not think—especially what was flattering
—quite simply and naturally.
"Dear count, you must let me look after your daughters! Though I am not
staying here long this time—nor are you—I will try to amuse them. I have
already heard much of you in Petersburg and wanted to get to know you," said
she to Natasha with her stereotyped and lovely smile. "I had heard about you
from my page, Drubetskoy. Have you heard he is getting married? And also
from my husband's friend Bolkonski, Prince Andrew Bolkonski," she went on
with special emphasis, implying that she knew of his relation to Natasha. To
get better acquainted she asked that one of the young ladies should come into
her box for the rest of the performance, and Natasha moved over to it.
The scene of the third act represented a palace in which many candles were
burning and pictures of knights with short beards hung on the walls. In the
middle stood what were probably a king and a queen. The king waved his
right arm and, evidently nervous, sang something badly and sat down on a
crimson throne. The maiden who had been first in white and then in light blue,
now wore only a smock, and stood beside the throne with her hair down. She
sang something mournfully, addressing the queen, but the king waved his arm
severely, and men and women with bare legs came in from both sides and
began dancing all together. Then the violins played very shrilly and merrily
and one of the women with thick bare legs and thin arms, separating from the
others, went behind the wings, adjusted her bodice, returned to the middle of
the stage, and began jumping and striking one foot rapidly against the other. In
the stalls everyone clapped and shouted "bravo!" Then one of the men went
into a corner of the stage. The cymbals and horns in the orchestra struck up
more loudly, and this man with bare legs jumped very high and waved his feet
about very rapidly. (He was Duport, who received sixty thousand rubles a year
for this art.) Everybody in the stalls, boxes, and galleries began clapping and
shouting with all their might, and the man stopped and began smiling and
bowing to all sides. Then other men and women danced with bare legs. Then
the king again shouted to the sound of music, and they all began singing. But
suddenly a storm came on, chromatic scales and diminished sevenths were
heard in the orchestra, everyone ran off, again dragging one of their number
away, and the curtain dropped. Once more there was a terrible noise and
clatter among the audience, and with rapturous faces everyone began shouting:
"Duport! Duport! Duport!" Natasha no longer thought this strange. She looked
about with pleasure, smiling joyfully.
"Isn't Duport delightful?" Helene asked her.
"Oh, yes," replied Natasha.

CHAPTER X
During the entr'acte a whiff of cold air came into Helene's box, the door
opened, and Anatole entered, stooping and trying not to brush against anyone.
"Let me introduce my brother to you," said Helene, her eyes shifting uneasily
from Natasha to Anatole.
Natasha turned her pretty little head toward the elegant young officer and
smiled at him over her bare shoulder. Anatole, who was as handsome at close
quarters as at a distance, sat down beside her and told her he had long wished
to have this happiness—ever since the Naryshkins' ball in fact, at which he
had had the well-remembered pleasure of seeing her. Kuragin was much more
sensible and simple with women than among men. He talked boldly and
naturally, and Natasha was strangely and agreeably struck by the fact that
there was nothing formidable in this man about whom there was so much talk,
but that on the contrary his smile was most naive, cheerful, and good-natured.
Kuragin asked her opinion of the performance and told her how at a previous
performance Semenova had fallen down on the stage.
"And do you know, Countess," he said, suddenly addressing her as an old,
familiar acquaintance, "we are getting up a costume tournament; you ought to
take part in it! It will be great fun. We shall all meet at the Karagins'! Please
come! No! Really, eh?" said he.
While saying this he never removed his smiling eyes from her face, her neck,
and her bare arms. Natasha knew for certain that he was enraptured by her.
This pleased her, yet his presence made her feel constrained and oppressed.
When she was not looking at him she felt that he was looking at her shoulders,
and she involuntarily caught his eye so that he should look into hers rather
than this. But looking into his eyes she was frightened, realizing that there was
not that barrier of modesty she had always felt between herself and other men.
She did not know how it was that within five minutes she had come to feel
herself terribly near to this man. When she turned away she feared he might
seize her from behind by her bare arm and kiss her on the neck. They spoke of
most ordinary things, yet she felt that they were closer to one another than she
had ever been to any man. Natasha kept turning to Helene and to her father, as
if asking what it all meant, but Helene was engaged in conversation with a
general and did not answer her look, and her father's eyes said nothing but
what they always said: "Having a good time? Well, I'm glad of it!"
During one of these moments of awkward silence when Anatole's prominent
eyes were gazing calmly and fixedly at her, Natasha, to break the silence,
asked him how he liked Moscow. She asked the question and blushed. She felt
all the time that by talking to him she was doing something improper. Anatole
smiled as though to encourage her.
"At first I did not like it much, because what makes a town pleasant ce sont les
jolies femmes, * isn't that so? But now I like it very much indeed," he said,
looking at her significantly. "You'll come to the costume tournament,
Countess? Do come!" and putting out his hand to her bouquet and dropping
his voice, he added, "You will be the prettiest there. Do come, dear countess,
and give me this flower as a pledge!"
* Are the pretty women.
Natasha did not understand what he was saying any more than he did himself,
but she felt that his incomprehensible words had an improper intention. She
did not know what to say and turned away as if she had not heard his remark.
But as soon as she had turned away she felt that he was there, behind, so close
behind her.
"How is he now? Confused? Angry? Ought I to put it right?" she asked
herself, and she could not refrain from turning round. She looked straight into
his eyes, and his nearness, self-assurance, and the good-natured tenderness of
his smile vanquished her. She smiled just as he was doing, gazing straight into
his eyes. And again she felt with horror that no barrier lay between him and
her.
The curtain rose again. Anatole left the box, serene and gay. Natasha went
back to her father in the other box, now quite submissive to the world she
found herself in. All that was going on before her now seemed quite natural,
but on the other hand all her previous thoughts of her betrothed, of Princess
Mary, or of life in the country did not once recur to her mind and were as if
belonging to a remote past.
In the fourth act there was some sort of devil who sang waving his arm about,
till the boards were withdrawn from under him and he disappeared down
below. That was the only part of the fourth act that Natasha saw. She felt
agitated and tormented, and the cause of this was Kuragin whom she could not
help watching. As they were leaving the theater Anatole came up to them,
called their carriage, and helped them in. As he was putting Natasha in he
pressed her arm above the elbow. Agitated and flushed she turned round. He
was looking at her with glittering eyes, smiling tenderly.
Only after she had reached home was Natasha able clearly to think over what
had happened to her, and suddenly remembering Prince Andrew she was
horrified, and at tea to which all had sat down after the opera, she gave a loud
exclamation, flushed, and ran out of the room.
"O God! I am lost!" she said to herself. "How could I let him?" She sat for a
long time hiding her flushed face in her hands trying to realize what had
happened to her, but was unable either to understand what had happened or
what she felt. Everything seemed dark, obscure, and terrible. There in that
enormous, illuminated theater where the bare-legged Duport, in a tinsel-
decorated jacket, jumped about to the music on wet boards, and young girls
and old men, and the nearly naked Helene with her proud, calm smile,
rapturously cried "bravo!"—there in the presence of that Helene it had all
seemed clear and simple; but now, alone by herself, it was incomprehensible.
"What is it? What was that terror I felt of him? What is this gnawing of
conscience I am feeling now?" she thought.
Only to the old countess at night in bed could Natasha have told all she was
feeling. She knew that Sonya with her severe and simple views would either
not understand it at all or would be horrified at such a confession. So Natasha
tried to solve what was torturing her by herself.
"Am I spoiled for Andrew's love or not?" she asked herself, and with soothing
irony replied: "What a fool I am to ask that! What did happen to me? Nothing!
I have done nothing, I didn't lead him on at all. Nobody will know and I shall
never see him again," she told herself. "So it is plain that nothing has
happened and there is nothing to repent of, and Andrew can love me still. But
why 'still?' O God, why isn't he here?" Natasha quieted herself for a moment,
but again some instinct told her that though all this was true, and though
nothing had happened, yet the former purity of her love for Prince Andrew had
perished. And again in imagination she went over her whole conversation with
Kuragin, and again saw the face, gestures, and tender smile of that bold
handsome man when he pressed her arm.
CHAPTER XI
Anatole Kuragin was staying in Moscow because his father had sent him away
from Petersburg, where he had been spending twenty thousand rubles a year in
cash, besides running up debts for as much more, which his creditors
demanded from his father.
His father announced to him that he would now pay half his debts for the last
time, but only on condition that he went to Moscow as adjutant to the
commander-in-chief—a post his father had procured for him—and would at
last try to make a good match there. He indicated to him Princess Mary and
Julie Karagina.
Anatole consented and went to Moscow, where he put up at Pierre's house.
Pierre received him unwillingly at first, but got used to him after a while,
sometimes even accompanied him on his carousals, and gave him money
under the guise of loans.
As Shinshin had remarked, from the time of his arrival Anatole had turned the
heads of the Moscow ladies, especially by the fact that he slighted them and
plainly preferred the gypsy girls and French actresses—with the chief of
whom, Mademoiselle George, he was said to be on intimate relations. He had
never missed a carousal at Danilov's or other Moscow revelers', drank whole
nights through, outvying everyone else, and was at all the balls and parties of
the best society. There was talk of his intrigues with some of the ladies, and he
flirted with a few of them at the balls. But he did not run after the unmarried
girls, especially the rich heiresses who were most of them plain. There was a
special reason for this, as he had got married two years before—a fact known
only to his most intimate friends. At that time while with his regiment in
Poland, a Polish landowner of small means had forced him to marry his
daughter. Anatole had very soon abandoned his wife and, for a payment which
he agreed to send to his father-in-law, had arranged to be free to pass himself
off as a bachelor.
Anatole was always content with his position, with himself, and with others.
He was instinctively and thoroughly convinced that it was impossible for him
to live otherwise than as he did and that he had never in his life done anything
base. He was incapable of considering how his actions might affect others or
what the consequences of this or that action of his might be. He was convinced
that, as a duck is so made that it must live in water, so God had made him such
that he must spend thirty thousand rubles a year and always occupy a
prominent position in society. He believed this so firmly that others, looking at
him, were persuaded of it too and did not refuse him either a leading place in
society or money, which he borrowed from anyone and everyone and
evidently would not repay.
He was not a gambler, at any rate he did not care about winning. He was not
vain. He did not mind what people thought of him. Still less could he be
accused of ambition. More than once he had vexed his father by spoiling his
own career, and he laughed at distinctions of all kinds. He was not mean, and
did not refuse anyone who asked of him. All he cared about was gaiety and
women, and as according to his ideas there was nothing dishonorable in these
tastes, and he was incapable of considering what the gratification of his tastes
entailed for others, he honestly considered himself irreproachable, sincerely
despised rogues and bad people, and with a tranquil conscience carried his
head high.
Rakes, those male Magdalenes, have a secret feeling of innocence similar to
that which female Magdalenes have, based on the same hope of forgiveness.
"All will be forgiven her, for she loved much; and all will be forgiven him, for
he enjoyed much."
Dolokhov, who had reappeared that year in Moscow after his exile and his
Persian adventures, and was leading a life of luxury, gambling, and
dissipation, associated with his old Petersburg comrade Kuragin and made use
of him for his own ends.
Anatole was sincerely fond of Dolokhov for his cleverness and audacity.
Dolokhov, who needed Anatole Kuragin's name, position, and connections as
a bait to draw rich young men into his gambling set, made use of him and
amused himself at his expense without letting the other feel it. Apart from the
advantage he derived from Anatole, the very process of dominating another's
will was in itself a pleasure, a habit, and a necessity to Dolokhov.
Natasha had made a strong impression on Kuragin. At supper after the opera
he described to Dolokhov with the air of a connoisseur the attractions of her
arms, shoulders, feet, and hair and expressed his intention of making love to
her. Anatole had no notion and was incapable of considering what might come
of such love-making, as he never had any notion of the outcome of any of his
actions.
"She's first-rate, my dear fellow, but not for us," replied Dolokhov.
"I will tell my sister to ask her to dinner," said Anatole. "Eh?"
"You'd better wait till she's married...."
"You know, I adore little girls, they lose their heads at once," pursued Anatole.
"You have been caught once already by a 'little girl,'" said Dolokhov who
knew of Kuragin's marriage. "Take care!"
"Well, that can't happen twice! Eh?" said Anatole, with a good-humored laugh.
CHAPTER XII
The day after the opera the Rostovs went nowhere and nobody came to see
them. Marya Dmitrievna talked to the count about something which they
concealed from Natasha. Natasha guessed they were talking about the old
prince and planning something, and this disquieted and offended her. She was
expecting Prince Andrew any moment and twice that day sent a manservant to
the Vozdvizhenka to ascertain whether he had come. He had not arrived. She
suffered more now than during her first days in Moscow. To her impatience
and pining for him were now added the unpleasant recollection of her
interview with Princess Mary and the old prince, and a fear and anxiety of
which she did not understand the cause. She continually fancied that either he
would never come or that something would happen to her before he came. She
could no longer think of him by herself calmly and continuously as she had
done before. As soon as she began to think of him, the recollection of the old
prince, of Princess Mary, of the theater, and of Kuragin mingled with her
thoughts. The question again presented itself whether she was not guilty,
whether she had not already broken faith with Prince Andrew, and again she
found herself recalling to the minutest detail every word, every gesture, and
every shade in the play of expression on the face of the man who had been
able to arouse in her such an incomprehensible and terrifying feeling. To the
family Natasha seemed livelier than usual, but she was far less tranquil and
happy than before.
On Sunday morning Marya Dmitrievna invited her visitors to Mass at her
parish church—the Church of the Assumption built over the graves of victims
of the plague.
"I don't like those fashionable churches," she said, evidently priding herself on
her independence of thought. "God is the same everywhere. We have an
excellent priest, he conducts the service decently and with dignity, and the
deacon is the same. What holiness is there in giving concerts in the choir? I
don't like it, it's just self-indulgence!"
Marya Dmitrievna liked Sundays and knew how to keep them. Her whole
house was scrubbed and cleaned on Saturdays; neither she nor the servants
worked, and they all wore holiday dress and went to church. At her table there
were extra dishes at dinner, and the servants had vodka and roast goose or
suckling pig. But in nothing in the house was the holiday so noticeable as in
Marya Dmitrievna's broad, stern face, which on that day wore an invariable
look of solemn festivity.
After Mass, when they had finished their coffee in the dining room where the
loose covers had been removed from the furniture, a servant announced that
the carriage was ready, and Marya Dmitrievna rose with a stern air. She wore
her holiday shawl, in which she paid calls, and announced that she was going
to see Prince Nicholas Bolkonski to have an explanation with him about
Natasha.
After she had gone, a dressmaker from Madame Suppert-Roguet waited on the
Rostovs, and Natasha, very glad of this diversion, having shut herself into a
room adjoining the drawing room, occupied herself trying on the new dresses.
Just as she had put on a bodice without sleeves and only tacked together, and
was turning her head to see in the glass how the back fitted, she heard in the
drawing room the animated sounds of her father's voice and another's—a
woman's—that made her flush. It was Helene. Natasha had not time to take off
the bodice before the door opened and Countess Bezukhova, dressed in a
purple velvet gown with a high collar, came into the room beaming with goodhumored amiable smiles.
"Oh, my enchantress!" she cried to the blushing Natasha. "Charming! No, this
is really beyond anything, my dear count," said she to Count Rostov who had
followed her in. "How can you live in Moscow and go nowhere? No, I won't
let you off! Mademoiselle George will recite at my house tonight and there'll
be some people, and if you don't bring your lovely girls—who are prettier than
Mademoiselle George—I won't know you! My husband is away in Tver or I
would send him to fetch you. You must come. You positively must! Between
eight and nine."
She nodded to the dressmaker, whom she knew and who had curtsied
respectfully to her, and seated herself in an armchair beside the looking glass,
draping the folds of her velvet dress picturesquely. She did not cease
chattering good-naturedly and gaily, continually praising Natasha's beauty. She
looked at Natasha's dresses and praised them, as well as a new dress of her
own made of "metallic gauze," which she had received from Paris, and
advised Natasha to have one like it.
"But anything suits you, my charmer!" she remarked.
A smile of pleasure never left Natasha's face. She felt happy and as if she were
blossoming under the praise of this dear Countess Bezukhova who had
formerly seemed to her so unapproachable and important and was now so kind
to her. Natasha brightened up and felt almost in love with this woman, who
was so beautiful and so kind. Helene for her part was sincerely delighted with
Natasha and wished to give her a good time. Anatole had asked her to bring
him and Natasha together, and she was calling on the Rostovs for that purpose.
The idea of throwing her brother and Natasha together amused her.
Though at one time, in Petersburg, she had been annoyed with Natasha for
drawing Boris away, she did not think of that now, and in her own way
heartily wished Natasha well. As she was leaving the Rostovs she called her
protegee aside.
"My brother dined with me yesterday—we nearly died of laughter—he ate
nothing and kept sighing for you, my charmer! He is madly, quite madly, in
love with you, my dear."
Natasha blushed scarlet when she heard this.
"How she blushes, how she blushes, my pretty!" said Helene. "You must
certainly come. If you love somebody, my charmer, that is not a reason to shut
yourself up. Even if you are engaged, I am sure your fiance would wish you to
go into society rather than be bored to death."
"So she knows I am engaged, and she and her husband Pierre—that good
Pierre—have talked and laughed about this. So it's all right." And again, under
Helene's influence, what had seemed terrible now seemed simple and natural.
"And she is such a grande dame, so kind, and evidently likes me so much. And
why not enjoy myself?" thought Natasha, gazing at Helene with wide-open,
wondering eyes.
Marya Dmitrievna came back to dinner taciturn and serious, having evidently
suffered a defeat at the old prince's. She was still too agitated by the encounter
to be able to talk of the affair calmly. In answer to the count's inquiries she
replied that things were all right and that she would tell about it next day. On
hearing of Countess Bezukhova's visit and the invitation for that evening,
Marya Dmitrievna remarked:
"I don't care to have anything to do with Bezukhova and don't advise you to;
however, if you've promised—go. It will divert your thoughts," she added,
addressing Natasha.
CHAPTER XIII
Count Rostov took the girls to Countess Bezukhova's. There were a good
many people there, but nearly all strangers to Natasha. Count Rostov was
displeased to see that the company consisted almost entirely of men and
women known for the freedom of their conduct. Mademoiselle George was
standing in a corner of the drawing room surrounded by young men. There
were several Frenchmen present, among them Metivier who from the time
Helene reached Moscow had been an intimate in her house. The count decided
not to sit down to cards or let his girls out of his sight and to get away as soon
as Mademoiselle George's performance was over.
Anatole was at the door, evidently on the lookout for the Rostovs.
Immediately after greeting the count he went up to Natasha and followed her.
As soon as she saw him she was seized by the same feeling she had had at the
opera—gratified vanity at his admiration of her and fear at the absence of a
moral barrier between them.
Helene welcomed Natasha delightedly and was loud in admiration of her
beauty and her dress. Soon after their arrival Mademoiselle George went out
of the room to change her costume. In the drawing room people began
arranging the chairs and taking their seats. Anatole moved a chair for Natasha
and was about to sit down beside her, but the count, who never lost sight of
her, took the seat himself. Anatole sat down behind her.
Mademoiselle George, with her bare, fat, dimpled arms, and a red shawl
draped over one shoulder, came into the space left vacant for her, and assumed
an unnatural pose. Enthusiastic whispering was audible.
Mademoiselle George looked sternly and gloomily at the audience and began
reciting some French verses describing her guilty love for her son. In some
places she raised her voice, in others she whispered, lifting her head
triumphantly; sometimes she paused and uttered hoarse sounds, rolling her
eyes.
"Adorable! divine! delicious!" was heard from every side.
Natasha looked at the fat actress, but neither saw nor heard nor understood
anything of what went on before her. She only felt herself again completely
borne away into this strange senseless world—so remote from her old world—
a world in which it was impossible to know what was good or bad, reasonable
or senseless. Behind her sat Anatole, and conscious of his proximity she
experienced a frightened sense of expectancy.
After the first monologue the whole company rose and surrounded
Mademoiselle George, expressing their enthusiasm.
"How beautiful she is!" Natasha remarked to her father who had also risen and
was moving through the crowd toward the actress.
"I don't think so when I look at you!" said Anatole, following Natasha. He said
this at a moment when she alone could hear him. "You are enchanting... from
the moment I saw you I have never ceased..."
"Come, come, Natasha!" said the count, as he turned back for his daughter.
"How beautiful she is!" Natasha without saying anything stepped up to her
father and looked at him with surprised inquiring eyes.
After giving several recitations, Mademoiselle George left, and Countess
Bezukhova asked her visitors into the ballroom.
The count wished to go home, but Helene entreated him not to spoil her
improvised ball, and the Rostovs stayed on. Anatole asked Natasha for a valse
and as they danced he pressed her waist and hand and told her she was
bewitching and that he loved her. During the ecossaise, which she also danced
with him, Anatole said nothing when they happened to be by themselves, but
merely gazed at her. Natasha lifted her frightened eyes to him, but there was
such confident tenderness in his affectionate look and smile that she could not,
whilst looking at him, say what she had to say. She lowered her eyes.
"Don't say such things to me. I am betrothed and love another," she said
rapidly.... She glanced at him.
Anatole was not upset or pained by what she had said.
"Don't speak to me of that! What can I do?" said he. "I tell you I am madly,
madly, in love with you! Is it my fault that you are enchanting?... It's our turn
to begin."
Natasha, animated and excited, looked about her with wide-open frightened
eyes and seemed merrier than usual. She understood hardly anything that went
on that evening. They danced the ecossaise and the Grossvater. Her father
asked her to come home, but she begged to remain. Wherever she went and
whomever she was speaking to, she felt his eyes upon her. Later on she
recalled how she had asked her father to let her go to the dressing room to
rearrange her dress, that Helene had followed her and spoken laughingly of
her brother's love, and that she again met Anatole in the little sitting room.
Helene had disappeared leaving them alone, and Anatole had taken her hand
and said in a tender voice:
"I cannot come to visit you but is it possible that I shall never see you? I love
you madly. Can I never...?" and, blocking her path, he brought his face close to
hers.
His large, glittering, masculine eyes were so close to hers that she saw nothing
but them.
"Natalie?" he whispered inquiringly while she felt her hands being painfully
pressed. "Natalie?"
"I don't understand. I have nothing to say," her eyes replied.
Burning lips were pressed to hers, and at the same instant she felt herself
released, and Helene's footsteps and the rustle of her dress were heard in the
room. Natasha looked round at her, and then, red and trembling, threw a
frightened look of inquiry at Anatole and moved toward the door.
"One word, just one, for God's sake!" cried Anatole.
She paused. She so wanted a word from him that would explain to her what
had happened and to which she could find no answer.
"Natalie, just a word, only one!" he kept repeating, evidently not knowing
what to say and he repeated it till Helene came up to them.
Helene returned with Natasha to the drawing room. The Rostovs went away
without staying for supper.
After reaching home Natasha did not sleep all night. She was tormented by the
insoluble question whether she loved Anatole or Prince Andrew. She loved
Prince Andrew—she remembered distinctly how deeply she loved him. But
she also loved Anatole, of that there was no doubt. "Else how could all this
have happened?" thought she. "If, after that, I could return his smile when
saying good-by, if I was able to let it come to that, it means that I loved him
from the first. It means that he is kind, noble, and splendid, and I could not
help loving him. What am I to do if I love him and the other one too?" she
asked herself, unable to find an answer to these terrible questions.
CHAPTER XIV
Morning came with its cares and bustle. Everyone got up and began to move
about and talk, dressmakers came again. Marya Dmitrievna appeared, and they
were called to breakfast. Natasha kept looking uneasily at everybody with
wide-open eyes, as if wishing to intercept every glance directed toward her,
and tried to appear the same as usual.
After breakfast, which was her best time, Marya Dmitrievna sat down in her
armchair and called Natasha and the count to her.
"Well, friends, I have now thought the whole matter over and this is my
advice," she began. "Yesterday, as you know, I went to see Prince Bolkonski.
Well, I had a talk with him.... He took it into his head to begin shouting, but I
am not one to be shouted down. I said what I had to say!"
"Well, and he?" asked the count.
"He? He's crazy... he did not want to listen. But what's the use of talking? As it
is we have worn the poor girl out," said Marya Dmitrievna. "My advice to you
is finish your business and go back home to Otradnoe... and wait there."
"Oh, no!" exclaimed Natasha.
"Yes, go back," said Marya Dmitrievna, "and wait there. If your betrothed
comes here now—there will be no avoiding a quarrel; but alone with the old
man he will talk things over and then come on to you."
Count Rostov approved of this suggestion, appreciating its reasonableness. If
the old man came round it would be all the better to visit him in Moscow or at
Bald Hills later on; and if not, the wedding, against his wishes, could only be
arranged at Otradnoe.
"That is perfectly true. And I am sorry I went to see him and took her," said
the old count.
"No, why be sorry? Being here, you had to pay your respects. But if he won't
—that's his affair," said Marya Dmitrievna, looking for something in her
reticule. "Besides, the trousseau is ready, so there is nothing to wait for; and
what is not ready I'll send after you. Though I don't like letting you go, it is the
best way. So go, with God's blessing!"
Having found what she was looking for in the reticule she handed it to
Natasha. It was a letter from Princess Mary.
"She has written to you. How she torments herself, poor thing! She's afraid
you might think that she does not like you."
"But she doesn't like me," said Natasha.
"Don't talk nonsense!" cried Marya Dmitrievna.
"I shan't believe anyone, I know she doesn't like me," replied Natasha boldly
as she took the letter, and her face expressed a cold and angry resolution that
caused Marya Dmitrievna to look at her more intently and to frown.
"Don't answer like that, my good girl!" she said. "What I say is true! Write an
answer!" Natasha did not reply and went to her own room to read Princess
Mary's letter.
Princess Mary wrote that she was in despair at the misunderstanding that had
occurred between them. Whatever her father's feelings might be, she begged
Natasha to believe that she could not help loving her as the one chosen by her
brother, for whose happiness she was ready to sacrifice everything.
"Do not think, however," she wrote, "that my father is ill-disposed toward you.
He is an invalid and an old man who must be forgiven; but he is good and
magnanimous and will love her who makes his son happy." Princess Mary
went on to ask Natasha to fix a time when she could see her again.
After reading the letter Natasha sat down at the writing table to answer it.
"Dear Princess," she wrote in French quickly and mechanically, and then
paused. What more could she write after all that had happened the evening
before? "Yes, yes! All that has happened, and now all is changed," she thought
as she sat with the letter she had begun before her. "Must I break off with him?
Must I really? That's awful..." and to escape from these dreadful thoughts she
went to Sonya and began sorting patterns with her.
After dinner Natasha went to her room and again took up Princess Mary's
letter. "Can it be that it is all over?" she thought. "Can it be that all this has
happened so quickly and has destroyed all that went before?" She recalled her
love for Prince Andrew in all its former strength, and at the same time felt that
she loved Kuragin. She vividly pictured herself as Prince Andrew's wife, and
the scenes of happiness with him she had so often repeated in her imagination,
and at the same time, aglow with excitement, recalled every detail of
yesterday's interview with Anatole.
"Why could that not be as well?" she sometimes asked herself in complete
bewilderment. "Only so could I be completely happy; but now I have to
choose, and I can't be happy without either of them. Only," she thought, "to
tell Prince Andrew what has happened or to hide it from him are both equally
impossible. But with that one nothing is spoiled. But am I really to abandon
forever the joy of Prince Andrew's love, in which I have lived so long?"
"Please, Miss!" whispered a maid entering the room with a mysterious air. "A
man told me to give you this-" and she handed Natasha a letter.
"Only, for Christ's sake..." the girl went on, as Natasha, without thinking,
mechanically broke the seal and read a love letter from Anatole, of which,
without taking in a word, she understood only that it was a letter from him—
from the man she loved. Yes, she loved him, or else how could that have
happened which had happened? And how could she have a love letter from
him in her hand?
With trembling hands Natasha held that passionate love letter which Dolokhov
had composed for Anatole, and as she read it she found in it an echo of all that
she herself imagined she was feeling.
"Since yesterday evening my fate has been sealed; to be loved by you or to
die. There is no other way for me," the letter began. Then he went on to say
that he knew her parents would not give her to him—for this there were secret
reasons he could reveal only to her—but that if she loved him she need only
say the word yes, and no human power could hinder their bliss. Love would
conquer all. He would steal her away and carry her off to the ends of the earth.
"Yes, yes! I love him!" thought Natasha, reading the letter for the twentieth
time and finding some peculiarly deep meaning in each word of it.
That evening Marya Dmitrievna was going to the Akharovs' and proposed to
take the girls with her. Natasha, pleading a headache, remained at home.
CHAPTER XV
On returning late in the evening Sonya went to Natasha's room, and to her
surprise found her still dressed and asleep on the sofa. Open on the table,
beside her lay Anatole's letter. Sonya picked it up and read it.
As she read she glanced at the sleeping Natasha, trying to find in her face an
explanation of what she was reading, but did not find it. Her face was calm,
gentle, and happy. Clutching her breast to keep herself from choking, Sonya,
pale and trembling with fear and agitation, sat down in an armchair and burst
into tears.
"How was it I noticed nothing? How could it go so far? Can she have left off
loving Prince Andrew? And how could she let Kuragin go to such lengths? He
is a deceiver and a villain, that's plain! What will Nicholas, dear noble
Nicholas, do when he hears of it? So this is the meaning of her excited,
resolute, unnatural look the day before yesterday, yesterday, and today,"
thought Sonya. "But it can't be that she loves him! She probably opened the
letter without knowing who it was from. Probably she is offended by it. She
could not do such a thing!"
Sonya wiped away her tears and went up to Natasha, again scanning her face.
"Natasha!" she said, just audibly.
Natasha awoke and saw Sonya.
"Ah, you're back?"
And with the decision and tenderness that often come at the moment of
awakening, she embraced her friend, but noticing Sonya's look of
embarrassment, her own face expressed confusion and suspicion.
"Sonya, you've read that letter?" she demanded.
"Yes," answered Sonya softly.
Natasha smiled rapturously.
"No, Sonya, I can't any longer!" she said. "I can't hide it from you any longer.
You know, we love one another! Sonya, darling, he writes... Sonya..."
Sonya stared open-eyed at Natasha, unable to believe her ears.
"And Bolkonski?" she asked.
"Ah, Sonya, if you only knew how happy I am!" cried Natasha. "You don't
know what love is...."
"But, Natasha, can that be all over?"
Natasha looked at Sonya with wide-open eyes as if she could not grasp the
question.
"Well, then, are you refusing Prince Andrew?" said Sonya.
"Oh, you don't understand anything! Don't talk nonsense, just listen!" said
Natasha, with momentary vexation.
"But I can't believe it," insisted Sonya. "I don't understand. How is it you have
loved a man for a whole year and suddenly... Why, you have only seen him
three times! Natasha, I don't believe you, you're joking! In three days to forget
everything and so..."
"Three days?" said Natasha. "It seems to me I've loved him a hundred years. It
seems to me that I have never loved anyone before. You can't understand it....
Sonya, wait a bit, sit here," and Natasha embraced and kissed her.
"I had heard that it happens like this, and you must have heard it too, but it's
only now that I feel such love. It's not the same as before. As soon as I saw
him I felt he was my master and I his slave, and that I could not help loving
him. Yes, his slave! Whatever he orders I shall do. You don't understand that.
What can I do? What can I do, Sonya?" cried Natasha with a happy yet
frightened expression.
"But think what you are doing," cried Sonya. "I can't leave it like this. This
secret correspondence... How could you let him go so far?" she went on, with
a horror and disgust she could hardly conceal.
"I told you that I have no will," Natasha replied. "Why can't you understand? I
love him!"
"Then I won't let it come to that... I shall tell!" cried Sonya, bursting into tears.
"What do you mean? For God's sake... If you tell, you are my enemy!"
declared Natasha. "You want me to be miserable, you want us to be
separated...."
When she saw Natasha's fright, Sonya shed tears of shame and pity for her
friend.
"But what has happened between you?" she asked. "What has he said to you?
Why doesn't he come to the house?"
Natasha did not answer her questions.
"For God's sake, Sonya, don't tell anyone, don't torture me," Natasha
entreated. "Remember no one ought to interfere in such matters! I have
confided in you...."
"But why this secrecy? Why doesn't he come to the house?" asked Sonya.
"Why doesn't he openly ask for your hand? You know Prince Andrew gave
you complete freedom—if it is really so; but I don't believe it! Natasha, have
you considered what these secret reasons can be?"
Natasha looked at Sonya with astonishment. Evidently this question presented
itself to her mind for the first time and she did not know how to answer it.
"I don't know what the reasons are. But there must be reasons!"
Sonya sighed and shook her head incredulously.
"If there were reasons..." she began.
But Natasha, guessing her doubts, interrupted her in alarm.
"Sonya, one can't doubt him! One can't, one can't! Don't you understand?" she
cried.
"Does he love you?"
"Does he love me?" Natasha repeated with a smile of pity at her friend's lack
of comprehension. "Why, you have read his letter and you have seen him."
"But if he is dishonorable?"
"He! dishonorable? If you only knew!" exclaimed Natasha.
"If he is an honorable man he should either declare his intentions or cease
seeing you; and if you won't do this, I will. I will write to him, and I will tell
Papa!" said Sonya resolutely.
"But I can't live without him!" cried Natasha.
"Natasha, I don't understand you. And what are you saying! Think of your
father and of Nicholas."
"I don't want anyone, I don't love anyone but him. How dare you say he is
dishonorable? Don't you know that I love him?" screamed Natasha. "Go away,
Sonya! I don't want to quarrel with you, but go, for God's sake go! You see
how I am suffering!" Natasha cried angrily, in a voice of despair and repressed
irritation. Sonya burst into sobs and ran from the room.
Natasha went to the table and without a moment's reflection wrote that answer
to Princess Mary which she had been unable to write all the morning. In this
letter she said briefly that all their misunderstandings were at an end; that
availing herself of the magnanimity of Prince Andrew who when he went
abroad had given her her freedom, she begged Princess Mary to forget
everything and forgive her if she had been to blame toward her, but that she
could not be his wife. At that moment this all seemed quite easy, simple, and
clear to Natasha.
On Friday the Rostovs were to return to the country, but on Wednesday the
count went with the prospective purchaser to his estate near Moscow.
On the day the count left, Sonya and Natasha were invited to a big dinner
party at the Karagins', and Marya Dmitrievna took them there. At that party
Natasha again met Anatole, and Sonya noticed that she spoke to him, trying
not to be overheard, and that all through dinner she was more agitated than
ever. When they got home Natasha was the first to begin the explanation
Sonya expected.
"There, Sonya, you were talking all sorts of nonsense about him," Natasha
began in a mild voice such as children use when they wish to be praised. "We
have had an explanation today."
"Well, what happened? What did he say? Natasha, how glad I am you're not
angry with me! Tell me everything—the whole truth. What did he say?"
Natasha became thoughtful.
"Oh, Sonya, if you knew him as I do! He said... He asked me what I had
promised Bolkonski. He was glad I was free to refuse him."
Sonya sighed sorrowfully.
"But you haven't refused Bolkonski?" said she.
"Perhaps I have. Perhaps all is over between me and Bolkonski. Why do you
think so badly of me?"
"I don't think anything, only I don't understand this..."
"Wait a bit, Sonya, you'll understand everything. You'll see what a man he is!
Now don't think badly of me or of him. I don't think badly of anyone: I love
and pity everybody. But what am I to do?"
Sonya did not succumb to the tender tone Natasha used toward her. The more
emotional and ingratiating the expression of Natasha's face became, the more
serious and stern grew Sonya's.
"Natasha," said she, "you asked me not to speak to you, and I haven't spoken,
but now you yourself have begun. I don't trust him, Natasha. Why this
secrecy?"
"Again, again!" interrupted Natasha.
"Natasha, I am afraid for you!"
"Afraid of what?"
"I am afraid you're going to your ruin," said Sonya resolutely, and was herself
horrified at what she had said.
Anger again showed in Natasha's face.
"And I'll go to my ruin, I will, as soon as possible! It's not your business! It
won't be you, but I, who'll suffer. Leave me alone, leave me alone! I hate you!"
"Natasha!" moaned Sonya, aghast.
"I hate you, I hate you! You're my enemy forever!" And Natasha ran out of the
room.
Natasha did not speak to Sonya again and avoided her. With the same
expression of agitated surprise and guilt she went about the house, taking up
now one occupation, now another, and at once abandoning them.
Hard as it was for Sonya, she watched her friend and did not let her out of her
sight.
The day before the count was to return, Sonya noticed that Natasha sat by the
drawing-room window all the morning as if expecting something and that she
made a sign to an officer who drove past, whom Sonya took to be Anatole.
Sonya began watching her friend still more attentively and noticed that at
dinner and all that evening Natasha was in a strange and unnatural state. She
answered questions at random, began sentences she did not finish, and laughed
at everything.
After tea Sonya noticed a housemaid at Natasha's door timidly waiting to let
her pass. She let the girl go in, and then listening at the door learned that
another letter had been delivered.
Then suddenly it became clear to Sonya that Natasha had some dreadful plan
for that evening. Sonya knocked at her door. Natasha did not let her in.
"She will run away with him!" thought Sonya. "She is capable of anything.
There was something particularly pathetic and resolute in her face today. She
cried as she said good-by to Uncle," Sonya remembered. "Yes, that's it, she
means to elope with him, but what am I to do?" thought she, recalling all the
signs that clearly indicated that Natasha had some terrible intention. "The
count is away. What am I to do? Write to Kuragin demanding an explanation?
But what is there to oblige him to reply? Write to Pierre, as Prince Andrew
asked me to in case of some misfortune?... But perhaps she really has already
refused Bolkonski—she sent a letter to Princess Mary yesterday. And Uncle is
away...." To tell Marya Dmitrievna who had such faith in Natasha seemed to
Sonya terrible. "Well, anyway," thought Sonya as she stood in the dark
passage, "now or never I must prove that I remember the family's goodness to
me and that I love Nicholas. Yes! If I don't sleep for three nights I'll not leave
this passage and will hold her back by force and will and not let the family be
disgraced," thought she.
CHAPTER XVI
Anatole had lately moved to Dolokhov's. The plan for Natalie Rostova's
abduction had been arranged and the preparations made by Dolokhov a few
days before, and on the day that Sonya, after listening at Natasha's door,
resolved to safeguard her, it was to have been put into execution. Natasha had
promised to come out to Kuragin at the back porch at ten that evening.
Kuragin was to put her into a troyka he would have ready and to drive her
forty miles to the village of Kamenka, where an unfrocked priest was in
readiness to perform a marriage ceremony over them. At Kamenka a relay of
horses was to wait which would take them to the Warsaw highroad, and from
there they would hasten abroad with post horses.
Anatole had a passport, an order for post horses, ten thousand rubles he had
taken from his sister and another ten thousand borrowed with Dolokhov's help.
Two witnesses for the mock marriage—Khvostikov, a retired petty official
whom Dolokhov made use of in his gambling transactions, and Makarin, a
retired hussar, a kindly, weak fellow who had an unbounded affection for
Kuragin—were sitting at tea in Dolokhov's front room.
In his large study, the walls of which were hung to the ceiling with Persian
rugs, bearskins, and weapons, sat Dolokhov in a traveling cloak and high
boots, at an open desk on which lay an abacus and some bundles of paper
money. Anatole, with uniform unbuttoned, walked to and fro from the room
where the witnesses were sitting, through the study to the room behind, where
his French valet and others were packing the last of his things. Dolokhov was
counting the money and noting something down.
"Well," he said, "Khvostikov must have two thousand."
"Give it to him, then," said Anatole.
"Makarka" (their name for Makarin) "will go through fire and water for you
for nothing. So here are our accounts all settled," said Dolokhov, showing him
the memorandum. "Is that right?"
"Yes, of course," returned Anatole, evidently not listening to Dolokhov and
looking straight before him with a smile that did not leave his face.
Dolokhov banged down the lid of his desk and turned to Anatole with an
ironic smile:
"Do you know? You'd really better drop it all. There's still time!"
"Fool," retorted Anatole. "Don't talk nonsense! If you only knew... it's the
devil knows what!"
"No, really, give it up!" said Dolokhov. "I am speaking seriously. It's no joke,
this plot you've hatched."
"What, teasing again? Go to the devil! Eh?" said Anatole, making a grimace.
"Really it's no time for your stupid jokes," and he left the room.
Dolokhov smiled contemptuously and condescendingly when Anatole had
gone out.
"You wait a bit," he called after him. "I'm not joking, I'm talking sense. Come
here, come here!"
Anatole returned and looked at Dolokhov, trying to give him his attention and
evidently submitting to him involuntarily.
"Now listen to me. I'm telling you this for the last time. Why should I joke
about it? Did I hinder you? Who arranged everything for you? Who found the
priest and got the passport? Who raised the money? I did it all."
"Well, thank you for it. Do you think I am not grateful?" And Anatole sighed
and embraced Dolokhov.
"I helped you, but all the same I must tell you the truth; it is a dangerous
business, and if you think about it—a stupid business. Well, you'll carry her
off—all right! Will they let it stop at that? It will come out that you're already
married. Why, they'll have you in the criminal court...."
"Oh, nonsense, nonsense!" Anatole ejaculated and again made a grimace.
"Didn't I explain to you? What?" And Anatole, with the partiality dull-witted
people have for any conclusion they have reached by their own reasoning,
repeated the argument he had already put to Dolokhov a hundred times.
"Didn't I explain to you that I have come to this conclusion: if this marriage is
invalid," he went on, crooking one finger, "then I have nothing to answer for;
but if it is valid, no matter! Abroad no one will know anything about it. Isn't
that so? And don't talk to me, don't, don't."
"Seriously, you'd better drop it! You'll only get yourself into a mess!"
"Go to the devil!" cried Anatole and, clutching his hair, left the room, but
returned at once and dropped into an armchair in front of Dolokhov with his
feet turned under him. "It's the very devil! What? Feel how it beats!" He took
Dolokhov's hand and put it on his heart. "What a foot, my dear fellow! What a
glance! A goddess!" he added in French. "What?"
Dolokhov with a cold smile and a gleam in his handsome insolent eyes looked
at him—evidently wishing to get some more amusement out of him.
"Well and when the money's gone, what then?"
"What then? Eh?" repeated Anatole, sincerely perplexed by a thought of the
future. "What then?... Then, I don't know.... But why talk nonsense!" He
glanced at his watch. "It's time!"
Anatole went into the back room.
"Now then! Nearly ready? You're dawdling!" he shouted to the servants.
Dolokhov put away the money, called a footman whom he ordered to bring
something for them to eat and drink before the journey, and went into the
room where Khvostikov and Makarin were sitting.
Anatole lay on the sofa in the study leaning on his elbow and smiling
pensively, while his handsome lips muttered tenderly to himself.
"Come and eat something. Have a drink!" Dolokhov shouted to him from the
other room.
"I don't want to," answered Anatole continuing to smile.
"Come! Balaga is here."
Anatole rose and went into the dining room. Balaga was a famous troyka
driver who had known Dolokhov and Anatole some six years and had given
them good service with his troykas. More than once when Anatole's regiment
was stationed at Tver he had taken him from Tver in the evening, brought him
to Moscow by daybreak, and driven him back again the next night. More than
once he had enabled Dolokhov to escape when pursued. More than once he
had driven them through the town with gypsies and "ladykins" as he called the
cocottes. More than once in their service he had run over pedestrians and upset
vehicles in the streets of Moscow and had always been protected from the
consequences by "my gentlemen" as he called them. He had ruined more than
one horse in their service. More than once they had beaten him, and more than
once they had made him drunk on champagne and Madeira, which he loved;
and he knew more than one thing about each of them which would long ago
have sent an ordinary man to Siberia. They often called Balaga into their
orgies and made him drink and dance at the gypsies', and more than one
thousand rubles of their money had passed through his hands. In their service
he risked his skin and his life twenty times a year, and in their service had lost
more horses than the money he had from them would buy. But he liked them;
liked that mad driving at twelve miles an hour, liked upsetting a driver or
running down a pedestrian, and flying at full gallop through the Moscow
streets. He liked to hear those wild, tipsy shouts behind him: "Get on! Get on!"
when it was impossible to go any faster. He liked giving a painful lash on the
neck to some peasant who, more dead than alive, was already hurrying out of
his way. "Real gentlemen!" he considered them.
Anatole and Dolokhov liked Balaga too for his masterly driving and because
he liked the things they liked. With others Balaga bargained, charging twenty-
five rubles for a two hours' drive, and rarely drove himself, generally letting
his young men do so. But with "his gentlemen" he always drove himself and
never demanded anything for his work. Only a couple of times a year—when
he knew from their valets that they had money in hand—he would turn up of a
morning quite sober and with a deep bow would ask them to help him. The
gentlemen always made him sit down.
"Do help me out, Theodore Ivanych, sir," or "your excellency," he would say.
"I am quite out of horses. Let me have what you can to go to the fair."
And Anatole and Dolokhov, when they had money, would give him a thousand
or a couple of thousand rubles.
Balaga was a fair-haired, short, and snub-nosed peasant of about twenty-
seven; red-faced, with a particularly red thick neck, glittering little eyes, and a
small beard. He wore a fine, dark-blue, silk-lined cloth coat over a sheepskin.
On entering the room now he crossed himself, turning toward the front corner
of the room, and went up to Dolokhov, holding out a small, black hand.
"Theodore Ivanych!" he said, bowing.
"How d'you do, friend? Well, here he is!"
"Good day, your excellency!" he said, again holding out his hand to Anatole
who had just come in.
"I say, Balaga," said Anatole, putting his hands on the man's shoulders, "do
you care for me or not? Eh? Now, do me a service.... What horses have you
come with? Eh?"
"As your messenger ordered, your special beasts," replied Balaga.
"Well, listen, Balaga! Drive all three to death but get me there in three hours.
Eh?"
"When they are dead, what shall I drive?" said Balaga with a wink.
"Mind, I'll smash your face in! Don't make jokes!" cried Anatole, suddenly
rolling his eyes.
"Why joke?" said the driver, laughing. "As if I'd grudge my gentlemen
anything! As fast as ever the horses can gallop, so fast we'll go!"
"Ah!" said Anatole. "Well, sit down."
"Yes, sit down!" said Dolokhov.
"I'll stand, Theodore Ivanych."
"Sit down; nonsense! Have a drink!" said Anatole, and filled a large glass of
Madeira for him.
The driver's eyes sparkled at the sight of the wine. After refusing it for
manners' sake, he drank it and wiped his mouth with a red silk handkerchief he
took out of his cap.
"And when are we to start, your excellency?"
"Well..." Anatole looked at his watch. "We'll start at once. Mind, Balaga!
You'll get there in time? Eh?"
"That depends on our luck in starting, else why shouldn't we be there in time?"
replied Balaga. "Didn't we get you to Tver in seven hours? I think you
remember that, your excellency?"
"Do you know, one Christmas I drove from Tver," said Anatole, smilingly at
the recollection and turning to Makarin who gazed rapturously at him with
wide-open eyes. "Will you believe it, Makarka, it took one's breath away, the
rate we flew. We came across a train of loaded sleighs and drove right over
two of them. Eh?"
"Those were horses!" Balaga continued the tale. "That time I'd harnessed two
young side horses with the bay in the shafts," he went on, turning to Dolokhov.
"Will you believe it, Theodore Ivanych, those animals flew forty miles? I
couldn't hold them in, my hands grew numb in the sharp frost so that I threw
down the reins—'Catch hold yourself, your excellency!' says I, and I just
tumbled on the bottom of the sleigh and sprawled there. It wasn't a case of
urging them on, there was no holding them in till we reached the place. The
devils took us there in three hours! Only the near one died of it."
CHAPTER XVII
Anatole went out of the room and returned a few minutes later wearing a fur
coat girt with a silver belt, and a sable cap jauntily set on one side and very
becoming to his handsome face. Having looked in a mirror, and standing
before Dolokhov in the same pose he had assumed before it, he lifted a glass
of wine.
"Well, good-by, Theodore. Thank you for everything and farewell!" said
Anatole. "Well, comrades and friends..." he considered for a moment "...of my
youth, farewell!" he said, turning to Makarin and the others.
Though they were all going with him, Anatole evidently wished to make
something touching and solemn out of this address to his comrades. He spoke
slowly in a loud voice and throwing out his chest slightly swayed one leg.
"All take glasses; you too, Balaga. Well, comrades and friends of my youth,
we've had our fling and lived and reveled. Eh? And now, when shall we meet
again? I am going abroad. We have had a good time—now farewell, lads! To
our health! Hurrah!..." he cried, and emptying his glass flung it on the floor.
"To your health!" said Balaga who also emptied his glass, and wiped his
mouth with his handkerchief.
Makarin embraced Anatole with tears in his eyes.
"Ah, Prince, how sorry I am to part from you!
"Let's go. Let's go!" cried Anatole.
Balaga was about to leave the room.
"No, stop!" said Anatole. "Shut the door; we have first to sit down. That's the
way."
They shut the door and all sat down.
"Now, quick march, lads!" said Anatole, rising.
Joseph, his valet, handed him his sabretache and saber, and they all went out
into the vestibule.
"And where's the fur cloak?" asked Dolokhov. "Hey, Ignatka! Go to Matrena
Matrevna and ask her for the sable cloak. I have heard what elopements are
like," continued Dolokhov with a wink. "Why, she'll rush out more dead than
alive just in the things she is wearing; if you delay at all there'll be tears and
'Papa' and 'Mamma,' and she's frozen in a minute and must go back—but you
wrap the fur cloak round her first thing and carry her to the sleigh."
The valet brought a woman's fox-lined cloak.
"Fool, I told you the sable one! Hey, Matrena, the sable!" he shouted so that
his voice rang far through the rooms.
A handsome, slim, and pale-faced gypsy girl with glittering black eyes and
curly blue-black hair, wearing a red shawl, ran out with a sable mantle on her
arm.
"Here, I don't grudge it—take it!" she said, evidently afraid of her master and
yet regretful of her cloak.
Dolokhov, without answering, took the cloak, threw it over Matrena, and
wrapped her up in it.
"That's the way," said Dolokhov, "and then so!" and he turned the collar up
round her head, leaving only a little of the face uncovered. "And then so, do
you see?" and he pushed Anatole's head forward to meet the gap left by the
collar, through which Matrena's brilliant smile was seen.
"Well, good-by, Matrena," said Anatole, kissing her. "Ah, my revels here are
over. Remember me to Steshka. There, good-by! Good-bye, Matrena, wish me
luck!"
"Well, Prince, may God give you great luck!" said Matrena in her gypsy
accent.
Two troykas were standing before the porch and two young drivers were
holding the horses. Balaga took his seat in the front one and holding his
elbows high arranged the reins deliberately. Anatole and Dolokhov got in with
him. Makarin, Khvostikov, and a valet seated themselves in the other sleigh.
"Well, are you ready?" asked Balaga.
"Go!" he cried, twisting the reins round his hands, and the troyka tore down
the Nikitski Boulevard.
"Tproo! Get out of the way! Hi!... Tproo!..." The shouting of Balaga and of the
sturdy young fellow seated on the box was all that could be heard. On the
Arbat Square the troyka caught against a carriage; something cracked, shouts
were heard, and the troyka flew along the Arbat Street.
After taking a turn along the Podnovinski Boulevard, Balaga began to rein in,
and turning back drew up at the crossing of the old Konyusheny Street.
The young fellow on the box jumped down to hold the horses and Anatole and
Dolokhov went along the pavement. When they reached the gate Dolokhov
whistled. The whistle was answered, and a maidservant ran out.
"Come into the courtyard or you'll be seen; she'll come out directly," said she.
Dolokhov stayed by the gate. Anatole followed the maid into the courtyard,
turned the corner, and ran up into the porch.
He was met by Gabriel, Marya Dmitrievna's gigantic footman.
"Come to the mistress, please," said the footman in his deep bass, intercepting
any retreat.
"To what Mistress? Who are you?" asked Anatole in a breathless whisper.
"Kindly step in, my orders are to bring you in."
"Kuragin! Come back!" shouted Dolokhov. "Betrayed! Back!"
Dolokhov, after Anatole entered, had remained at the wicket gate and was
struggling with the yard porter who was trying to lock it. With a last desperate
effort Dolokhov pushed the porter aside, and when Anatole ran back seized
him by the arm, pulled him through the wicket, and ran back with him to the
troyka.
CHAPTER XVIII
Marya Dmitrievna, having found Sonya weeping in the corridor, made her
confess everything, and intercepting the note to Natasha she read it and went
into Natasha's room with it in her hand.
"You shameless good-for-nothing!" said she. "I won't hear a word."
Pushing back Natasha who looked at her with astonished but tearless eyes, she
locked her in; and having given orders to the yard porter to admit the persons
who would be coming that evening, but not to let them out again, and having
told the footman to bring them up to her, she seated herself in the drawing
room to await the abductors.
When Gabriel came to inform her that the men who had come had run away
again, she rose frowning, and clasping her hands behind her paced through the
rooms a long time considering what she should do. Toward midnight she went
to Natasha's room fingering the key in her pocket. Sonya was sitting sobbing
in the corridor. "Marya Dmitrievna, for God's sake let me in to her!" she
pleaded, but Marya Dmitrievna unlocked the door and went in without giving
her an answer.... "Disgusting, abominable... In my house... horrid girl, hussy!
I'm only sorry for her father!" thought she, trying to restrain her wrath. "Hard
as it may be, I'll tell them all to hold their tongues and will hide it from the
count." She entered the room with resolute steps. Natasha lying on the sofa,
her head hidden in her hands, and she did not stir. She was in just the same
position in which Marya Dmitrievna had left her.
"A nice girl! Very nice!" said Marya Dmitrievna. "Arranging meetings with
lovers in my house! It's no use pretending: you listen when I speak to you!"
And Marya Dmitrievna touched her arm. "Listen when I speak! You've
disgraced yourself like the lowest of hussies. I'd treat you differently, but I'm
sorry for your father, so I will conceal it."
Natasha did not change her position, but her whole body heaved with
noiseless, convulsive sobs which choked her. Marya Dmitrievna glanced
round at Sonya and seated herself on the sofa beside Natasha.
"It's lucky for him that he escaped me; but I'll find him!" she said in her rough
voice. "Do you hear what I am saying or not?" she added.
She put her large hand under Natasha's face and turned it toward her. Both
Marya Dmitrievna and Sonya were amazed when they saw how Natasha
looked. Her eyes were dry and glistening, her lips compressed, her cheeks
sunken.
"Let me be!... What is it to me?... I shall die!" she muttered, wrenching herself
from Marya Dmitrievna's hands with a vicious effort and sinking down again
into her former position.
"Natalie!" said Marya Dmitrievna. "I wish for your good. Lie still, stay like
that then, I won't touch you. But listen. I won't tell you how guilty you are.
You know that yourself. But when your father comes back tomorrow what am
I to tell him? Eh?"
Again Natasha's body shook with sobs.
"Suppose he finds out, and your brother, and your betrothed?"
"I have no betrothed: I have refused him!" cried Natasha.
"That's all the same," continued Marya Dmitrievna. "If they hear of this, will
they let it pass? He, your father, I know him... if he challenges him to a duel
will that be all right? Eh?"
"Oh, let me be! Why have you interfered at all? Why? Why? Who asked you
to?" shouted Natasha, raising herself on the sofa and looking malignantly at
Marya Dmitrievna.
"But what did you want?" cried Marya Dmitrievna, growing angry again.
"Were you kept under lock and key? Who hindered his coming to the house?
Why carry you off as if you were some gypsy singing girl?... Well, if he had
carried you off... do you think they wouldn't have found him? Your father, or
brother, or your betrothed? And he's a scoundrel, a wretch—that's a fact!"
"He is better than any of you!" exclaimed Natasha getting up. "If you hadn't
interfered... Oh, my God! What is it all? What is it? Sonya, why?... Go away!"
And she burst into sobs with the despairing vehemence with which people
bewail disasters they feel they have themselves occasioned. Marya Dmitrievna
was to speak again but Natasha cried out:
"Go away! Go away! You all hate and despise me!" and she threw herself back
on the sofa.
Marya Dmitrievna went on admonishing her for some time, enjoining on her
that it must all be kept from her father and assuring her that nobody would
know anything about it if only Natasha herself would undertake to forget it all
and not let anyone see that something had happened. Natasha did not reply,
nor did she sob any longer, but she grew cold and had a shivering fit. Marya
Dmitrievna put a pillow under her head, covered her with two quilts, and
herself brought her some lime-flower water, but Natasha did not respond to
her.
"Well, let her sleep," said Marya Dmitrievna as she went out of the room
supposing Natasha to be asleep.
But Natasha was not asleep; with pale face and fixed wide-open eyes she
looked straight before her. All that night she did not sleep or weep and did not
speak to Sonya who got up and went to her several times.
Next day Count Rostov returned from his estate near Moscow in time for
lunch as he had promised. He was in very good spirits; the affair with the
purchaser was going on satisfactorily, and there was nothing to keep him any
longer in Moscow, away from the countess whom he missed. Marya
Dmitrievna met him and told him that Natasha had been very unwell the day
before and that they had sent for the doctor, but that she was better now.
Natasha had not left her room that morning. With compressed and parched lips
and dry fixed eyes, she sat at the window, uneasily watching the people who
drove past and hurriedly glancing round at anyone who entered the room. She
was evidently expecting news of him and that he would come or would write
to her.
When the count came to see her she turned anxiously round at the sound of a
man's footstep, and then her face resumed its cold and malevolent expression.
She did not even get up to greet him. "What is the matter with you, my angel?
Are you ill?" asked the count.
After a moment's silence Natasha answered: "Yes, ill."
In reply to the count's anxious inquiries as to why she was so dejected and
whether anything had happened to her betrothed, she assured him that nothing
had happened and asked him not to worry. Marya Dmitrievna confirmed
Natasha's assurances that nothing had happened. From the pretense of illness,
from his daughter's distress, and by the embarrassed faces of Sonya and Marya
Dmitrievna, the count saw clearly that something had gone wrong during his
absence, but it was so terrible for him to think that anything disgraceful had
happened to his beloved daughter, and he so prized his own cheerful
tranquillity, that he avoided inquiries and tried to assure himself that nothing
particularly had happened; and he was only dissatisfied that her indisposition
delayed their return to the country.
CHAPTER XIX
From the day his wife arrived in Moscow Pierre had been intending to go
away somewhere, so as not to be near her. Soon after the Rostovs came to
Moscow the effect Natasha had on him made him hasten to carry out his
intention. He went to Tver to see Joseph Alexeevich's widow, who had long
since promised to hand over to him some papers of her deceased husband's.
When he returned to Moscow Pierre was handed a letter from Marya
Dmitrievna asking him to come and see her on a matter of great importance
relating to Andrew Bolkonski and his betrothed. Pierre had been avoiding
Natasha because it seemed to him that his feeling for her was stronger than a
married man's should be for his friend's fiancee. Yet some fate constantly
threw them together.
"What can have happened? And what can they want with me?" thought he as
he dressed to go to Marya Dmitrievna's. "If only Prince Andrew would hurry
up and come and marry her!" thought he on his way to the house.
On the Tverskoy Boulevard a familiar voice called to him.
"Pierre! Been back long?" someone shouted. Pierre raised his head. In a sleigh
drawn by two gray trotting-horses that were bespattering the dashboard with
snow, Anatole and his constant companion Makarin dashed past. Anatole was
sitting upright in the classic pose of military dandies, the lower part of his face
hidden by his beaver collar and his head slightly bent. His face was fresh and
rosy, his white-plumed hat, tilted to one side, disclosed his curled and
pomaded hair besprinkled with powdery snow.
"Yes, indeed, that's a true sage," thought Pierre. "He sees nothing beyond the
pleasure of the moment, nothing troubles him and so he is always cheerful,
satisfied, and serene. What wouldn't I give to be like him!" he thought
enviously.
In Marya Dmitrievna's anteroom the footman who helped him off with his fur
coat said that the mistress asked him to come to her bedroom.
When he opened the ballroom door Pierre saw Natasha sitting at the window,
with a thin, pale, and spiteful face. She glanced round at him, frowned, and
left the room with an expression of cold dignity.
"What has happened?" asked Pierre, entering Marya Dmitrievna's room.
"Fine doings!" answered Dmitrievna. "For fifty-eight years have I lived in this
world and never known anything so disgraceful!"
And having put him on his honor not to repeat anything she told him, Marya
Dmitrievna informed him that Natasha had refused Prince Andrew without her
parents' knowledge and that the cause of this was Anatole Kuragin into whose
society Pierre's wife had thrown her and with whom Natasha had tried to elope
during her father's absence, in order to be married secretly.
Pierre raised his shoulders and listened open-mouthed to what was told him,
scarcely able to believe his own ears. That Prince Andrew's deeply loved
affianced wife—the same Natasha Rostova who used to be so charming—
should give up Bolkonski for that fool Anatole who was already secretly
married (as Pierre knew), and should be so in love with him as to agree to run
away with him, was something Pierre could not conceive and could not
imagine.
He could not reconcile the charming impression he had of Natasha, whom he
had known from a child, with this new conception of her baseness, folly, and
cruelty. He thought of his wife. "They are all alike!" he said to himself,
reflecting that he was not the only man unfortunate enough to be tied to a bad
woman. But still he pitied Prince Andrew to the point of tears and
sympathized with his wounded pride, and the more he pitied his friend the
more did he think with contempt and even with disgust of that Natasha who
had just passed him in the ballroom with such a look of cold dignity. He did
not know that Natasha's soul was overflowing with despair, shame, and
humiliation, and that it was not her fault that her face happened to assume an
expression of calm dignity and severity.
"But how get married?" said Pierre, in answer to Marya Dmitrievna. "He could
not marry—he is married!"
"Things get worse from hour to hour!" ejaculated Marya Dmitrievna. "A nice
youth! What a scoundrel! And she's expecting him—expecting him since
yesterday. She must be told! Then at least she won't go on expecting him."
After hearing the details of Anatole's marriage from Pierre, and giving vent to
her anger against Anatole in words of abuse, Marya Dmitrievna told Pierre
why she had sent for him. She was afraid that the count or Bolkonski, who
might arrive at any moment, if they knew of this affair (which she hoped to
hide from them) might challenge Anatole to a duel, and she therefore asked
Pierre to tell his brother-in-law in her name to leave Moscow and not dare to
let her set eyes on him again. Pierre—only now realizing the danger to the old
count, Nicholas, and Prince Andrew—promised to do as she wished. Having
briefly and exactly explained her wishes to him, she let him go to the drawing
room.
"Mind, the count knows nothing. Behave as if you know nothing either," she
said. "And I will go and tell her it is no use expecting him! And stay to dinner
if you care to!" she called after Pierre.
Pierre met the old count, who seemed nervous and upset. That morning
Natasha had told him that she had rejected Bolkonski.
"Troubles, troubles, my dear fellow!" he said to Pierre. "What troubles one has
with these girls without their mother! I do so regret having come here.... I will
be frank with you. Have you heard she has broken off her engagement without
consulting anybody? It's true this engagement never was much to my liking.
Of course he is an excellent man, but still, with his father's disapproval they
wouldn't have been happy, and Natasha won't lack suitors. Still, it has been
going on so long, and to take such a step without father's or mother's consent!
And now she's ill, and God knows what! It's hard, Count, hard to manage
daughters in their mother's absence...."
Pierre saw that the count was much upset and tried to change the subject, but
the count returned to his troubles.
Sonya entered the room with an agitated face.
"Natasha is not quite well; she's in her room and would like to see you. Marya
Dmitrievna is with her and she too asks you to come."
"Yes, you are a great friend of Bolkonski's, no doubt she wants to send him a
message," said the count. "Oh dear! Oh dear! How happy it all was!"
And clutching the spare gray locks on his temples the count left the room.
When Marya Dmitrievna told Natasha that Anatole was married, Natasha did
not wish to believe it and insisted on having it confirmed by Pierre himself.
Sonya told Pierre this as she led him along the corridor to Natasha's room.
Natasha, pale and stern, was sitting beside Marya Dmitrievna, and her eyes,
glittering feverishly, met Pierre with a questioning look the moment he
entered. She did not smile or nod, but only gazed fixedly at him, and her look
asked only one thing: was he a friend, or like the others an enemy in regard to
Anatole? As for Pierre, he evidently did not exist for her.
"He knows all about it," said Marya Dmitrievna pointing to Pierre and
addressing Natasha. "Let him tell you whether I have told the truth."
Natasha looked from one to the other as a hunted and wounded animal looks at
the approaching dogs and sportsmen.
"Natalya Ilynichna," Pierre began, dropping his eyes with a feeling of pity for
her and loathing for the thing he had to do, "whether it is true or not should
make no difference to you, because..."
"Then it is not true that he's married!"
"Yes, it is true."
"Has he been married long?" she asked. "On your honor?..."
Pierre gave his word of honor.
"Is he still here?" she asked, quickly.
"Yes, I have just seen him."
She was evidently unable to speak and made a sign with her hands that they
should leave her alone.
CHAPTER XX
Pierre did not stay for dinner, but left the room and went away at once. He
drove through the town seeking Anatole Kuragin, at the thought of whom now
the blood rushed to his heart and he felt a difficulty in breathing. He was not at
the ice hills, nor at the gypsies', nor at Komoneno's. Pierre drove to the club. In
the club all was going on as usual. The members who were assembling for
dinner were sitting about in groups; they greeted Pierre and spoke of the town
news. The footman having greeted him, knowing his habits and his
acquaintances, told him there was a place left for him in the small dining room
and that Prince Michael Zakharych was in the library, but Paul Timofeevich
had not yet arrived. One of Pierre's acquaintances, while they were talking
about the weather, asked if he had heard of Kuragin's abduction of Rostova
which was talked of in the town, and was it true? Pierre laughed and said it
was nonsense for he had just come from the Rostovs'. He asked everyone
about Anatole. One man told him he had not come yet, and another that he
was coming to dinner. Pierre felt it strange to see this calm, indifferent crowd
of people unaware of what was going on in his soul. He paced through the
ballroom, waited till everyone had come, and as Anatole had not turned up did
not stay for dinner but drove home.
Anatole, for whom Pierre was looking, dined that day with Dolokhov,
consulting him as to how to remedy this unfortunate affair. It seemed to him
essential to see Natasha. In the evening he drove to his sister's to discuss with
her how to arrange a meeting. When Pierre returned home after vainly hunting
all over Moscow, his valet informed him that Prince Anatole was with the
countess. The countess' drawing room was full of guests.
Pierre without greeting his wife whom he had not seen since his return—at
that moment she was more repulsive to him than ever—entered the drawing
room and seeing Anatole went up to him.
"Ah, Pierre," said the countess going up to her husband. "You don't know what
a plight our Anatole..."
She stopped, seeing in the forward thrust of her husband's head, in his glowing
eyes and his resolute gait, the terrible indications of that rage and strength
which she knew and had herself experienced after his duel with Dolokhov.
"Where you are, there is vice and evil!" said Pierre to his wife. "Anatole, come
with me! I must speak to you," he added in French.
Anatole glanced round at his sister and rose submissively, ready to follow
Pierre. Pierre, taking him by the arm, pulled him toward himself and was
leading him from the room.
"If you allow yourself in my drawing room..." whispered Helene, but Pierre
did not reply and went out of the room.
Anatole followed him with his usual jaunty step but his face betrayed anxiety.
Having entered his study Pierre closed the door and addressed Anatole without
looking at him.
"You promised Countess Rostova to marry her and were about to elope with
her, is that so?"
"Mon cher," answered Anatole (their whole conversation was in French), "I
don't consider myself bound to answer questions put to me in that tone."
Pierre's face, already pale, became distorted by fury. He seized Anatole by the
collar of his uniform with his big hand and shook him from side to side till
Anatole's face showed a sufficient degree of terror.
"When I tell you that I must talk to you!..." repeated Pierre.
"Come now, this is stupid. What?" said Anatole, fingering a button of his
collar that had been wrenched loose with a bit of the cloth.
"You're a scoundrel and a blackguard, and I don't know what deprives me from
the pleasure of smashing your head with this!" said Pierre, expressing himself
so artificially because he was talking French.
He took a heavy paperweight and lifted it threateningly, but at once put it back
in its place.
"Did you promise to marry her?"
"I... I didn't think of it. I never promised, because..."
Pierre interrupted him.
"Have you any letters of hers? Any letters?" he said, moving toward Anatole.
Anatole glanced at him and immediately thrust his hand into his pocket and
drew out his pocketbook.
Pierre took the letter Anatole handed him and, pushing aside a table that stood
in his way, threw himself on the sofa.
"I shan't be violent, don't be afraid!" said Pierre in answer to a frightened
gesture of Anatole's. "First, the letters," said he, as if repeating a lesson to
himself. "Secondly," he continued after a short pause, again rising and again
pacing the room, "tomorrow you must get out of Moscow."
"But how can I?..."
"Thirdly," Pierre continued without listening to him, "you must never breathe
a word of what has passed between you and Countess Rostova. I know I can't
prevent your doing so, but if you have a spark of conscience..." Pierre paced
the room several times in silence.
Anatole sat at a table frowning and biting his lips.
"After all, you must understand that besides your pleasure there is such a thing
as other people's happiness and peace, and that you are ruining a whole life for
the sake of amusing yourself! Amuse yourself with women like my wife—
with them you are within your rights, for they know what you want of them.
They are armed against you by the same experience of debauchery; but to
promise a maid to marry her... to deceive, to kidnap.... Don't you understand
that it is as mean as beating an old man or a child?..."
Pierre paused and looked at Anatole no longer with an angry but with a
questioning look.
"I don't know about that, eh?" said Anatole, growing more confident as Pierre
mastered his wrath. "I don't know that and don't want to," he said, not looking
at Pierre and with a slight tremor of his lower jaw, "but you have used such
words to me—'mean' and so on—which as a man of honor I can't allow
anyone to use."
Pierre glanced at him with amazement, unable to understand what he wanted.
"Though it was tête-à-tête," Anatole continued, "still I can't..."
"Is it satisfaction you want?" said Pierre ironically.
"You could at least take back your words. What? If you want me to do as you
wish, eh?"
"I take them back, I take them back!" said Pierre, "and I ask you to forgive
me." Pierre involuntarily glanced at the loose button. "And if you require
money for your journey..."
Anatole smiled. The expression of that base and cringing smile, which Pierre
knew so well in his wife, revolted him.
"Oh, vile and heartless brood!" he exclaimed, and left the room.
Next day Anatole left for Petersburg.
CHAPTER XXI
Pierre drove to Marya Dmitrievna's to tell her of the fulfillment of her wish
that Kuragin should be banished from Moscow. The whole house was in a
state of alarm and commotion. Natasha was very ill, having, as Marya
Dmitrievna told him in secret, poisoned herself the night after she had been
told that Anatole was married, with some arsenic she had stealthily procured.
After swallowing a little she had been so frightened that she woke Sonya and
told her what she had done. The necessary antidotes had been administered in
time and she was now out of danger, though still so weak that it was out of the
question to move her to the country, and so the countess had been sent for.
Pierre saw the distracted count, and Sonya, who had a tear-stained face, but he
could not see Natasha.
Pierre dined at the club that day and heard on all sides gossip about the
attempted abduction of Rostova. He resolutely denied these rumors, assuring
everyone that nothing had happened except that his brother-in-law had
proposed to her and been refused. It seemed to Pierre that it was his duty to
conceal the whole affair and re-establish Natasha's reputation.
He was awaiting Prince Andrew's return with dread and went every day to the
old prince's for news of him.
Old Prince Bolkonski heard all the rumors current in the town from
Mademoiselle Bourienne and had read the note to Princess Mary in which
Natasha had broken off her engagement. He seemed in better spirits than usual
and awaited his son with great impatience.
Some days after Anatole's departure Pierre received a note from Prince
Andrew, informing him of his arrival and asking him to come to see him.
As soon as he reached Moscow, Prince Andrew had received from his father
Natasha's note to Princess Mary breaking off her engagement (Mademoiselle
Bourienne had purloined it from Princess Mary and given it to the old prince),
and he heard from him the story of Natasha's elopement, with additions.
Prince Andrew had arrived in the evening and Pierre came to see him next
morning. Pierre expected to find Prince Andrew in almost the same state as
Natasha and was therefore surprised on entering the drawing room to hear him
in the study talking in a loud animated voice about some intrigue going on in
Petersburg. The old prince's voice and another now and then interrupted him.
Princess Mary came out to meet Pierre. She sighed, looking toward the door of
the room where Prince Andrew was, evidently intending to express her
sympathy with his sorrow, but Pierre saw by her face that she was glad both at
what had happened and at the way her brother had taken the news of Natasha's
faithlessness.
"He says he expected it," she remarked. "I know his pride will not let him
express his feelings, but still he has taken it better, far better, than I expected.
Evidently it had to be...."
"But is it possible that all is really ended?" asked Pierre.
Princess Mary looked at him with astonishment. She did not understand how
he could ask such a question. Pierre went into the study. Prince Andrew,
greatly changed and plainly in better health, but with a fresh horizontal
wrinkle between his brows, stood in civilian dress facing his father and Prince
Meshcherski, warmly disputing and vigorously gesticulating. The
conversation was about Speranski—the news of whose sudden exile and
alleged treachery had just reached Moscow.
"Now he is censured and accused by all who were enthusiastic about him a
month ago," Prince Andrew was saying, "and by those who were unable to
understand his aims. To judge a man who is in disfavor and to throw on him
all the blame of other men's mistakes is very easy, but I maintain that if
anything good has been accomplished in this reign it was done by him, by him
alone."
He paused at the sight of Pierre. His face quivered and immediately assumed a
vindictive expression.
"Posterity will do him justice," he concluded, and at once turned to Pierre.
"Well, how are you? Still getting stouter?" he said with animation, but the new
wrinkle on his forehead deepened. "Yes, I am well," he said in answer to
Pierre's question, and smiled.
To Pierre that smile said plainly: "I am well, but my health is now of no use to
anyone."
After a few words to Pierre about the awful roads from the Polish frontier,
about people he had met in Switzerland who knew Pierre, and about M.
Dessalles, whom he had brought from abroad to be his son's tutor, Prince
Andrew again joined warmly in the conversation about Speranski which was
still going on between the two old men.
"If there were treason, or proofs of secret relations with Napoleon, they would
have been made public," he said with warmth and haste. "I do not, and never
did, like Speranski personally, but I like justice!"
Pierre now recognized in his friend a need with which he was only too
familiar, to get excited and to have arguments about extraneous matters in
order to stifle thoughts that were too oppressive and too intimate. When Prince
Meshcherski had left, Prince Andrew took Pierre's arm and asked him into the
room that had been assigned him. A bed had been made up there, and some
open portmanteaus and trunks stood about. Prince Andrew went to one and
took out a small casket, from which he drew a packet wrapped in paper. He
did it all silently and very quickly. He stood up and coughed. His face was
gloomy and his lips compressed.
"Forgive me for troubling you..."
Pierre saw that Prince Andrew was going to speak of Natasha, and his broad
face expressed pity and sympathy. This expression irritated Prince Andrew,
and in a determined, ringing, and unpleasant tone he continued:
"I have received a refusal from Countess Rostova and have heard reports of
your brother-in-law having sought her hand, or something of that kind. Is that
true?"
"Both true and untrue," Pierre began; but Prince Andrew interrupted him.
"Here are her letters and her portrait," said he.
He took the packet from the table and handed it to Pierre.
"Give this to the countess... if you see her."
"She is very ill," said Pierre.
"Then she is here still?" said Prince Andrew. "And Prince Kuragin?" he added
quickly.
"He left long ago. She has been at death's door."
"I much regret her illness," said Prince Andrew; and he smiled like his father,
coldly, maliciously, and unpleasantly.
"So Monsieur Kuragin has not honored Countess Rostova with his hand?" said
Prince Andrew, and he snorted several times.
"He could not marry, for he was married already," said Pierre.
Prince Andrew laughed disagreeably, again reminding one of his father.
"And where is your brother-in-law now, if I may ask?" he said.
"He has gone to Peters... But I don't know," said Pierre.
"Well, it doesn't matter," said Prince Andrew. "Tell Countess Rostova that she
was and is perfectly free and that I wish her all that is good."
Pierre took the packet. Prince Andrew, as if trying to remember whether he
had something more to say, or waiting to see if Pierre would say anything,
looked fixedly at him.
"I say, do you remember our discussion in Petersburg?" asked Pierre,
"about..."
"Yes," returned Prince Andrew hastily. "I said that a fallen woman should be
forgiven, but I didn't say I could forgive her. I can't."
"But can this be compared...?" said Pierre.
Prince Andrew interrupted him and cried sharply: "Yes, ask her hand again, be
magnanimous, and so on?... Yes, that would be very noble, but I am unable to
follow in that gentleman's footsteps. If you wish to be my friend never speak
to me of that... of all that! Well, good-by. So you'll give her the packet?"
Pierre left the room and went to the old prince and Princess Mary.
The old man seemed livelier than usual. Princess Mary was the same as
always, but beneath her sympathy for her brother, Pierre noticed her
satisfaction that the engagement had been broken off. Looking at them Pierre
realized what contempt and animosity they all felt for the Rostovs, and that it
was impossible in their presence even to mention the name of her who could
give up Prince Andrew for anyone else.
At dinner the talk turned on the war, the approach of which was becoming
evident. Prince Andrew talked incessantly, arguing now with his father, now
with the Swiss tutor Dessalles, and showing an unnatural animation, the cause
of which Pierre so well understood.
CHAPTER XXII
That same evening Pierre went to the Rostovs' to fulfill the commission
entrusted to him. Natasha was in bed, the count at the club, and Pierre, after
giving the letters to Sonya, went to Marya Dmitrievna who was interested to
know how Prince Andrew had taken the news. Ten minutes later Sonya came
to Marya Dmitrievna.
"Natasha insists on seeing Count Peter Kirilovich," said she.
"But how? Are we to take him up to her? The room there has not been tidied
up."
"No, she has dressed and gone into the drawing room," said Sonya.
Marya Dmitrievna only shrugged her shoulders.
"When will her mother come? She has worried me to death! Now mind, don't
tell her everything!" said she to Pierre. "One hasn't the heart to scold her, she
is so much to be pitied, so much to be pitied."
Natasha was standing in the middle of the drawing room, emaciated, with a
pale set face, but not at all shamefaced as Pierre expected to find her. When he
appeared at the door she grew flurried, evidently undecided whether to go to
meet him or to wait till he came up.
Pierre hastened to her. He thought she would give him her hand as usual; but
she, stepping up to him, stopped, breathing heavily, her arms hanging
lifelessly just in the pose she used to stand in when she went to the middle of
the ballroom to sing, but with quite a different expression of face.
"Peter Kirilovich," she began rapidly, "Prince Bolkonski was your friend—is
your friend," she corrected herself. (It seemed to her that everything that had
once been must now be different.) "He told me once to apply to you..."
Pierre sniffed as he looked at her, but did not speak. Till then he had
reproached her in his heart and tried to despise her, but he now felt so sorry for
her that there was no room in his soul for reproach.
"He is here now: tell him... to for... forgive me!" She stopped and breathed still
more quickly, but did not shed tears.
"Yes... I will tell him," answered Pierre; "but..."
He did not know what to say.
Natasha was evidently dismayed at the thought of what he might think she had
meant.
"No, I know all is over," she said hurriedly. "No, that can never be. I'm only
tormented by the wrong I have done him. Tell him only that I beg him to
forgive, forgive, forgive me for everything...."
She trembled all over and sat down on a chair.
A sense of pity he had never before known overflowed Pierre's heart.
"I will tell him, I will tell him everything once more," said Pierre. "But... I
should like to know one thing...."
"Know what?" Natasha's eyes asked.
"I should like to know, did you love..." Pierre did not know how to refer to
Anatole and flushed at the thought of him—"did you love that bad man?"
"Don't call him bad!" said Natasha. "But I don't know, don't know at all...."
She began to cry and a still greater sense of pity, tenderness, and love welled
up in Pierre. He felt the tears trickle under his spectacles and hoped they
would not be noticed.
"We won't speak of it any more, my dear," said Pierre, and his gentle, cordial
tone suddenly seemed very strange to Natasha.
"We won't speak of it, my dear—I'll tell him everything; but one thing I beg of
you, consider me your friend and if you want help, advice, or simply to open
your heart to someone—not now, but when your mind is clearer think of me!"
He took her hand and kissed it. "I shall be happy if it's in my power..."
Pierre grew confused.
"Don't speak to me like that. I am not worth it!" exclaimed Natasha and turned
to leave the room, but Pierre held her hand.
He knew he had something more to say to her. But when he said it he was
amazed at his own words.
"Stop, stop! You have your whole life before you," said he to her.
"Before me? No! All is over for me," she replied with shame and
self-abasement.
"All over?" he repeated. "If I were not myself, but the handsomest,
cleverest, and best man in the world, and were free, I would this moment
ask on my knees for your hand and your love!"
For the first time for many days Natasha wept tears of gratitude and
tenderness, and glancing at Pierre she went out of the room.
Pierre too when she had gone almost ran into the anteroom, restraining tears of
tenderness and joy that choked him, and without finding the sleeves of his fur
cloak threw it on and got into his sleigh.
"Where to now, your excellency?" asked the coachman.
"Where to?" Pierre asked himself. "Where can I go now? Surely not to the
club or to pay calls?" All men seemed so pitiful, so poor, in comparison with
this feeling of tenderness and love he experienced: in comparison with that
softened, grateful, last look she had given him through her tears.
"Home!" said Pierre, and despite twenty-two degrees of frost Fahrenheit he
threw open the bearskin cloak from his broad chest and inhaled the air with
joy.
It was clear and frosty. Above the dirty, ill-lit streets, above the black roofs,
stretched the dark starry sky. Only looking up at the sky did Pierre cease to
feel how sordid and humiliating were all mundane things compared with the
heights to which his soul had just been raised. At the entrance to the Arbat
Square an immense expanse of dark starry sky presented itself to his eyes.
Almost in the center of it, above the Prechistenka Boulevard, surrounded and
sprinkled on all sides by stars but distinguished from them all by its nearness
to the earth, its white light, and its long uplifted tail, shone the enormous and
brilliant comet of 1812—the comet which was said to portend all kinds of
woes and the end of the world. In Pierre, however, that comet with its long
luminous tail aroused no feeling of fear. On the contrary he gazed joyfully, his
eyes moist with tears, at this bright comet which, having traveled in its orbit
with inconceivable velocity through immeasurable space, seemed suddenly—
like an arrow piercing the earth—to remain fixed in a chosen spot, vigorously
holding its tail erect, shining and displaying its white light amid countless
other scintillating stars. It seemed to Pierre that this comet fully responded to
what was passing in his own softened and uplifted soul, now blossoming into a
new life.
BOOK NINE: 1812
CHAPTER I
From the close of the year 1811 intensified arming and concentrating of the
forces of Western Europe began, and in 1812 these forces—millions of men,
reckoning those transporting and feeding the army—moved from the west
eastwards to the Russian frontier, toward which since 1811 Russian forces had
been similarly drawn. On the twelfth of June, 1812, the forces of Western
Europe crossed the Russian frontier and war began, that is, an event took place
opposed to human reason and to human nature. Millions of men perpetrated
against one another such innumerable crimes, frauds, treacheries, thefts,
forgeries, issues of false money, burglaries, incendiarisms, and murders as in
whole centuries are not recorded in the annals of all the law courts of the
world, but which those who committed them did not at the time regard as
being crimes.
What produced this extraordinary occurrence? What were its causes? The
historians tell us with naive assurance that its causes were the wrongs inflicted
on the Duke of Oldenburg, the nonobservance of the Continental System, the
ambition of Napoleon, the firmness of Alexander, the mistakes of the
diplomatists, and so on.
Consequently, it would only have been necessary for Metternich, Rumyantsev,
or Talleyrand, between a levee and an evening party, to have taken proper
pains and written a more adroit note, or for Napoleon to have written to
Alexander: "My respected Brother, I consent to restore the duchy to the Duke
of Oldenburg"—and there would have been no war.
We can understand that the matter seemed like that to contemporaries. It
naturally seemed to Napoleon that the war was caused by England's intrigues
(as in fact he said on the island of St. Helena). It naturally seemed to members
of the English Parliament that the cause of the war was Napoleon's ambition;
to the Duke of Oldenburg, that the cause of the war was the violence done to
him; to businessmen that the cause of the war was the Continental System
which was ruining Europe; to the generals and old soldiers that the chief
reason for the war was the necessity of giving them employment; to the
legitimists of that day that it was the need of re-establishing les bons principes,
and to the diplomatists of that time that it all resulted from the fact that the
alliance between Russia and Austria in 1809 had not been sufficiently well
concealed from Napoleon, and from the awkward wording of Memorandum
No. 178. It is natural that these and a countless and infinite quantity of other
reasons, the number depending on the endless diversity of points of view,
presented themselves to the men of that day; but to us, to posterity who view
the thing that happened in all its magnitude and perceive its plain and terrible
meaning, these causes seem insufficient. To us it is incomprehensible that
millions of Christian men killed and tortured each other either because
Napoleon was ambitious or Alexander was firm, or because England's policy
was astute or the Duke of Oldenburg wronged. We cannot grasp what
connection such circumstances have with the actual fact of slaughter and
violence: why because the Duke was wronged, thousands of men from the
other side of Europe killed and ruined the people of Smolensk and Moscow
and were killed by them.
To us, their descendants, who are not historians and are not carried away by
the process of research and can therefore regard the event with unclouded
common sense, an incalculable number of causes present themselves. The
deeper we delve in search of these causes the more of them we find; and each
separate cause or whole series of causes appears to us equally valid in itself
and equally false by its insignificance compared to the magnitude of the
events, and by its impotence—apart from the cooperation of all the other
coincident causes—to occasion the event. To us, the wish or objection of this
or that French corporal to serve a second term appears as much a cause as
Napoleon's refusal to withdraw his troops beyond the Vistula and to restore the
duchy of Oldenburg; for had he not wished to serve, and had a second, a third,
and a thousandth corporal and private also refused, there would have been so
many less men in Napoleon's army and the war could not have occurred.
Had Napoleon not taken offense at the demand that he should withdraw
beyond the Vistula, and not ordered his troops to advance, there would have
been no war; but had all his sergeants objected to serving a second term then
also there could have been no war. Nor could there have been a war had there
been no English intrigues and no Duke of Oldenburg, and had Alexander not
felt insulted, and had there not been an autocratic government in Russia, or a
Revolution in France and a subsequent dictatorship and Empire, or all the
things that produced the French Revolution, and so on. Without each of these
causes nothing could have happened. So all these causes—myriads of causes
—coincided to bring it about. And so there was no one cause for that
occurrence, but it had to occur because it had to. Millions of men, renouncing
their human feelings and reason, had to go from west to east to slay their
fellows, just as some centuries previously hordes of men had come from the
east to the west, slaying their fellows.
The actions of Napoleon and Alexander, on whose words the event seemed to
hang, were as little voluntary as the actions of any soldier who was drawn into
the campaign by lot or by conscription. This could not be otherwise, for in
order that the will of Napoleon and Alexander (on whom the event seemed to
depend) should be carried out, the concurrence of innumerable circumstances
was needed without any one of which the event could not have taken place. It
was necessary that millions of men in whose hands lay the real power—the
soldiers who fired, or transported provisions and guns—should consent to
carry out the will of these weak individuals, and should have been induced to
do so by an infinite number of diverse and complex causes.
We are forced to fall back on fatalism as an explanation of irrational events
(that is to say, events the reasonableness of which we do not understand). The
more we try to explain such events in history reasonably, the more
unreasonable and incomprehensible do they become to us.
Each man lives for himself, using his freedom to attain his personal aims, and
feels with his whole being that he can now do or abstain from doing this or
that action; but as soon as he has done it, that action performed at a certain
moment in time becomes irrevocable and belongs to history, in which it has
not a free but a predestined significance.
There are two sides to the life of every man, his individual life, which is the
more free the more abstract its interests, and his elemental hive life in which
he inevitably obeys laws laid down for him.
Man lives consciously for himself, but is an unconscious instrument in the
attainment of the historic, universal, aims of humanity. A deed done is
irrevocable, and its result coinciding in time with the actions of millions of
other men assumes an historic significance. The higher a man stands on the
social ladder, the more people he is connected with and the more power he has
over others, the more evident is the predestination and inevitability of his
every action.
"The king's heart is in the hands of the Lord."
A king is history's slave.
History, that is, the unconscious, general, hive life of mankind, uses every
moment of the life of kings as a tool for its own purposes.
Though Napoleon at that time, in 1812, was more convinced than ever that it
depended on him, verser (ou ne pas verser) le sang de ses peuples *—as
Alexander expressed it in the last letter he wrote him—he had never been so
much in the grip of inevitable laws, which compelled him, while thinking that
he was acting on his own volition, to perform for the hive life—that is to say,
for history—whatever had to be performed.
* "To shed (or not to shed) the blood of his peoples."
The people of the west moved eastwards to slay their fellow men, and by the
law of coincidence thousands of minute causes fitted in and co-ordinated to
produce that movement and war: reproaches for the nonobservance of the
Continental System, the Duke of Oldenburg's wrongs, the movement of troops
into Prussia—undertaken (as it seemed to Napoleon) only for the purpose of
securing an armed peace, the French Emperor's love and habit of war
coinciding with his people's inclinations, allurement by the grandeur of the
preparations, and the expenditure on those preparations and the need of
obtaining advantages to compensate for that expenditure, the intoxicating
honors he received in Dresden, the diplomatic negotiations which, in the
opinion of contemporaries, were carried on with a sincere desire to attain
peace, but which only wounded the self-love of both sides, and millions of
other causes that adapted themselves to the event that was happening or
coincided with it.
When an apple has ripened and falls, why does it fall? Because of its attraction
to the earth, because its stalk withers, because it is dried by the sun, because it
grows heavier, because the wind shakes it, or because the boy standing below
wants to eat it?
Nothing is the cause. All this is only the coincidence of conditions in which all
vital organic and elemental events occur. And the botanist who finds that the
apple falls because the cellular tissue decays and so forth is equally right with
the child who stands under the tree and says the apple fell because he wanted
to eat it and prayed for it. Equally right or wrong is he who says that Napoleon
went to Moscow because he wanted to, and perished because Alexander
desired his destruction, and he who says that an undermined hill weighing a
million tons fell because the last navvy struck it for the last time with his
mattock. In historic events the so-called great men are labels giving names to
events, and like labels they have but the smallest connection with the event
itself.
Every act of theirs, which appears to them an act of their own will, is in an
historical sense involuntary and is related to the whole course of history and
predestined from eternity.
CHAPTER II
On the twenty-ninth of May Napoleon left Dresden, where he had spent three
weeks surrounded by a court that included princes, dukes, kings, and even an
emperor. Before leaving, Napoleon showed favor to the emperor, kings, and
princes who had deserved it, reprimanded the kings and princes with whom he
was dissatisfied, presented pearls and diamonds of his own—that is, which he
had taken from other kings—to the Empress of Austria, and having, as his
historian tells us, tenderly embraced the Empress Marie Louise—who
regarded him as her husband, though he had left another wife in Paris—left
her grieved by the parting which she seemed hardly able to bear. Though the
diplomatists still firmly believed in the possibility of peace and worked
zealously to that end, and though the Emperor Napoleon himself wrote a letter
to Alexander, calling him Monsieur mon frere, and sincerely assured him that
he did not want war and would always love and honor him—yet he set off to
join his army, and at every station gave fresh orders to accelerate the
movement of his troops from west to east. He went in a traveling coach with
six horses, surrounded by pages, aides-de-camp, and an escort, along the road
to Posen, Thorn, Danzig, and Konigsberg. At each of these towns thousands of
people met him with excitement and enthusiasm.
The army was moving from west to east, and relays of six horses carried him
in the same direction. On the tenth of June, * coming up with the army, he
spent the night in apartments prepared for him on the estate of a Polish count
in the Vilkavisski forest.
* Old style.
Next day, overtaking the army, he went in a carriage to the Niemen, and,
changing into a Polish uniform, he drove to the riverbank in order to select a
place for the crossing.
Seeing, on the other side, some Cossacks (les Cosaques) and the wide-
spreading steppes in the midst of which lay the holy city of Moscow (Moscou,
la ville sainte), the capital of a realm such as the Scythia into which Alexander
the Great had marched—Napoleon unexpectedly, and contrary alike to
strategic and diplomatic considerations, ordered an advance, and the next day
his army began to cross the Niemen.
Early in the morning of the twelfth of June he came out of his tent, which was
pitched that day on the steep left bank of the Niemen, and looked through a
spyglass at the streams of his troops pouring out of the Vilkavisski forest and
flowing over the three bridges thrown across the river. The troops, knowing of
the Emperor's presence, were on the lookout for him, and when they caught
sight of a figure in an overcoat and a cocked hat standing apart from his suite
in front of his tent on the hill, they threw up their caps and shouted: "Vive
l'Empereur!" and one after another poured in a ceaseless stream out of the vast
forest that had concealed them and, separating, flowed on and on by the three
bridges to the other side.
"Now we'll go into action. Oh, when he takes it in hand himself, things get
hot... by heaven!... There he is!... Vive l'Empereur! So these are the steppes of
Asia! It's a nasty country all the same. Au revoir, Beauche; I'll keep the best
palace in Moscow for you! Au revoir. Good luck!... Did you see the Emperor?
Vive l'Empereur!... preur!—If they make me Governor of India, Gerard, I'll
make you Minister of Kashmir—that's settled. Vive l'Empereur! Hurrah!
hurrah! hurrah! The Cossacks—those rascals—see how they run! Vive
l'Empereur! There he is, do you see him? I've seen him twice, as I see you
now. The little corporal... I saw him give the cross to one of the veterans....
Vive l'Empereur!" came the voices of men, old and young, of most diverse
characters and social positions. On the faces of all was one common
expression of joy at the commencement of the long-expected campaign and of
rapture and devotion to the man in the gray coat who was standing on the hill.
On the thirteenth of June a rather small, thoroughbred Arab horse was brought
to Napoleon. He mounted it and rode at a gallop to one of the bridges over the
Niemen, deafened continually by incessant and rapturous acclamations which
he evidently endured only because it was impossible to forbid the soldiers to
express their love of him by such shouting, but the shouting which
accompanied him everywhere disturbed him and distracted him from the
military cares that had occupied him from the time he joined the army. He
rode across one of the swaying pontoon bridges to the farther side, turned
sharply to the left, and galloped in the direction of Kovno, preceded by
enraptured, mounted chasseurs of the Guard who, breathless with delight,
galloped ahead to clear a path for him through the troops. On reaching the
broad river Viliya, he stopped near a regiment of Polish uhlans stationed by
the river.
"Vivat!" shouted the Poles, ecstatically, breaking their ranks and pressing
against one another to see him.
Napoleon looked up and down the river, dismounted, and sat down on a log
that lay on the bank. At a mute sign from him, a telescope was handed him
which he rested on the back of a happy page who had run up to him, and he
gazed at the opposite bank. Then he became absorbed in a map laid out on the
logs. Without lifting his head he said something, and two of his aides-de-camp
galloped off to the Polish uhlans.
"What? What did he say?" was heard in the ranks of the Polish uhlans when
one of the aides-de-camp rode up to them.
The order was to find a ford and to cross the river. The colonel of the Polish
uhlans, a handsome old man, flushed and, fumbling in his speech from
excitement, asked the aide-de-camp whether he would be permitted to swim
the river with his uhlans instead of seeking a ford. In evident fear of refusal,
like a boy asking for permission to get on a horse, he begged to be allowed to
swim across the river before the Emperor's eyes. The aide-de-camp replied
that probably the Emperor would not be displeased at this excess of zeal.
As soon as the aide-de-camp had said this, the old mustached officer, with
happy face and sparkling eyes, raised his saber, shouted "Vivat!" and,
commanding the uhlans to follow him, spurred his horse and galloped into the
river. He gave an angry thrust to his horse, which had grown restive under
him, and plunged into the water, heading for the deepest part where the current
was swift. Hundreds of uhlans galloped in after him. It was cold and uncanny
in the rapid current in the middle of the stream, and the uhlans caught hold of
one another as they fell off their horses. Some of the horses were drowned and
some of the men; the others tried to swim on, some in the saddle and some
clinging to their horses' manes. They tried to make their way forward to the
opposite bank and, though there was a ford one third of a mile away, were
proud that they were swimming and drowning in this river under the eyes of
the man who sat on the log and was not even looking at what they were doing.
When the aide-de-camp, having returned and choosing an opportune moment,
ventured to draw the Emperor's attention to the devotion of the Poles to his
person, the little man in the gray overcoat got up and, having summoned
Berthier, began pacing up and down the bank with him, giving him
instructions and occasionally glancing disapprovingly at the drowning uhlans
who distracted his attention.
For him it was no new conviction that his presence in any part of the world,
from Africa to the steppes of Muscovy alike, was enough to dumfound people
and impel them to insane self-oblivion. He called for his horse and rode to his
quarters.
Some forty uhlans were drowned in the river, though boats were sent to their
assistance. The majority struggled back to the bank from which they had
started. The colonel and some of his men got across and with difficulty
clambered out on the further bank. And as soon as they had got out, in their
soaked and streaming clothes, they shouted "Vivat!" and looked ecstatically at
the spot where Napoleon had been but where he no longer was and at that
moment considered themselves happy.
That evening, between issuing one order that the forged Russian paper money
prepared for use in Russia should be delivered as quickly as possible and
another that a Saxon should be shot, on whom a letter containing information
about the orders to the French army had been found, Napoleon also gave
instructions that the Polish colonel who had needlessly plunged into the river
should be enrolled in the Legion d'honneur of which Napoleon was himself
the head.
Quos vult perdere dementat. *
* Those whom (God) wishes to destroy he drives mad.
CHAPTER III
The Emperor of Russia had, meanwhile, been in Vilna for more than a month,
reviewing troops and holding maneuvers. Nothing was ready for the war that
everyone expected and to prepare for which the Emperor had come from
Petersburg. There was no general plan of action. The vacillation between the
various plans that were proposed had even increased after the Emperor had
been at headquarters for a month. Each of the three armies had its own
commander-in-chief, but there was no supreme commander of all the forces,
and the Emperor did not assume that responsibility himself.
The longer the Emperor remained in Vilna the less did everybody—tired of
waiting—prepare for the war. All the efforts of those who surrounded the
sovereign seemed directed merely to making him spend his time pleasantly
and forget that war was impending.
In June, after many balls and fetes given by the Polish magnates, by the
courtiers, and by the Emperor himself, it occurred to one of the Polish aides-
de-camp in attendance that a dinner and ball should be given for the Emperor
by his aides-de-camp. This idea was eagerly received. The Emperor gave his
consent. The aides-de-camp collected money by subscription. The lady who
was thought to be most pleasing to the Emperor was invited to act as hostess.
Count Bennigsen, being a landowner in the Vilna province, offered his country
house for the fete, and the thirteenth of June was fixed for a ball, dinner,
regatta, and fireworks at Zakret, Count Bennigsen's country seat.
The very day that Napoleon issued the order to cross the Niemen, and his
vanguard, driving off the Cossacks, crossed the Russian frontier, Alexander
spent the evening at the entertainment given by his aides-de-camp at
Bennigsen's country house.
It was a gay and brilliant fete. Connoisseurs of such matters declared that
rarely had so many beautiful women been assembled in one place. Countess
Bezukhova was present among other Russian ladies who had followed the
sovereign from Petersburg to Vilna and eclipsed the refined Polish ladies by
her massive, so-called Russian type of beauty. The Emperor noticed her and
honored her with a dance.
Boris Drubetskoy, having left his wife in Moscow and being for the present en
garcon (as he phrased it), was also there and, though not an aide-de-camp, had
subscribed a large sum toward the expenses. Boris was now a rich man who
had risen to high honors and no longer sought patronage but stood on an equal
footing with the highest of those of his own age. He was meeting Helene in
Vilna after not having seen her for a long time and did not recall the past, but
as Helene was enjoying the favors of a very important personage and Boris
had only recently married, they met as good friends of long standing.
At midnight dancing was still going on. Helene, not having a suitable partner,
herself offered to dance the mazurka with Boris. They were the third couple.
Boris, coolly looking at Helene's dazzling bare shoulders which emerged from
a dark, gold-embroidered, gauze gown, talked to her of old acquaintances and
at the same time, unaware of it himself and unnoticed by others, never for an
instant ceased to observe the Emperor who was in the same room. The
Emperor was not dancing, he stood in the doorway, stopping now one pair and
now another with gracious words which he alone knew how to utter.
As the mazurka began, Boris saw that Adjutant General Balashev, one of those
in closest attendance on the Emperor, went up to him and contrary to court
etiquette stood near him while he was talking to a Polish lady. Having finished
speaking to her, the Emperor looked inquiringly at Balashev and, evidently
understanding that he only acted thus because there were important reasons for
so doing, nodded slightly to the lady and turned to him. Hardly had Balashev
begun to speak before a look of amazement appeared on the Emperor's face.
He took Balashev by the arm and crossed the room with him, unconsciously
clearing a path seven yards wide as the people on both sides made way for
him. Boris noticed Arakcheev's excited face when the sovereign went out with
Balashev. Arakcheev looked at the Emperor from under his brow and, sniffing
with his red nose, stepped forward from the crowd as if expecting the Emperor
to address him. (Boris understood that Arakcheev envied Balashev and was
displeased that evidently important news had reached the Emperor otherwise
than through himself.)
But the Emperor and Balashev passed out into the illuminated garden without
noticing Arakcheev who, holding his sword and glancing wrathfully around,
followed some twenty paces behind them.
All the time Boris was going through the figures of the mazurka, he was
worried by the question of what news Balashev had brought and how he could
find it out before others. In the figure in which he had to choose two ladies, he
whispered to Helene that he meant to choose Countess Potocka who, he
thought, had gone out onto the veranda, and glided over the parquet to the
door opening into the garden, where, seeing Balashev and the Emperor
returning to the veranda, he stood still. They were moving toward the door.
Boris, fluttering as if he had not had time to withdraw, respectfully pressed
close to the doorpost with bowed head.
The Emperor, with the agitation of one who has been personally affronted, was
finishing with these words:
"To enter Russia without declaring war! I will not make peace as long as a
single armed enemy remains in my country!" It seemed to Boris that it gave
the Emperor pleasure to utter these words. He was satisfied with the form in
which he had expressed his thoughts, but displeased that Boris had overheard
it.
"Let no one know of it!" the Emperor added with a frown.
Boris understood that this was meant for him and, closing his eyes, slightly
bowed his head. The Emperor re-entered the ballroom and remained there
about another half-hour.
Boris was thus the first to learn the news that the French army had crossed the
Niemen and, thanks to this, was able to show certain important personages that
much that was concealed from others was usually known to him, and by this
means he rose higher in their estimation.
The unexpected news of the French having crossed the Niemen was
particularly startling after a month of unfulfilled expectations, and at a ball. On
first receiving the news, under the influence of indignation and resentment the
Emperor had found a phrase that pleased him, fully expressed his feelings, and
has since become famous. On returning home at two o'clock that night he sent
for his secretary, Shishkov, and told him to write an order to the troops and a
rescript to Field Marshal Prince Saltykov, in which he insisted on the words
being inserted that he would not make peace so long as a single armed
Frenchman remained on Russian soil.
Next day the following letter was sent to Napoleon:
Monsieur mon frere,
Yesterday I learned that, despite the loyalty with which I have kept my
engagements with Your Majesty, your troops have crossed the Russian
frontier, and I have this moment received from Petersburg a note, in which
Count Lauriston informs me, as a reason for this aggression, that Your Majesty
has considered yourself to be in a state of war with me from the time Prince
Kuragin asked for his passports. The reasons on which the Duc de Bassano
based his refusal to deliver them to him would never have led me to suppose
that that could serve as a pretext for aggression. In fact, the ambassador, as he
himself has declared, was never authorized to make that demand, and as soon
as I was informed of it I let him know how much I disapproved of it and
ordered him to remain at his post. If Your Majesty does not intend to shed the
blood of our peoples for such a misunderstanding, and consents to withdraw
your troops from Russian territory, I will regard what has passed as not having
occurred and an understanding between us will be possible. In the contrary
case, Your Majesty, I shall see myself forced to repel an attack that nothing on
my part has provoked. It still depends on Your Majesty to preserve humanity
from the calamity of another war. I am, etc.,
(signed) Alexander.
CHAPTER IV
At two in the morning of the fourteenth of June, the Emperor, having sent for
Balashev and read him his letter to Napoleon, ordered him to take it and hand
it personally to the French Emperor. When dispatching Balashev, the Emperor
repeated to him the words that he would not make peace so long as a single
armed enemy remained on Russian soil and told him to transmit those words
to Napoleon. Alexander did not insert them in his letter to Napoleon, because
with his characteristic tact he felt it would be injudicious to use them at a
moment when a last attempt at reconciliation was being made, but he
definitely instructed Balashev to repeat them personally to Napoleon.
Having set off in the small hours of the fourteenth, accompanied by a bugler
and two Cossacks, Balashev reached the French outposts at the village of
Rykonty, on the Russian side of the Niemen, by dawn. There he was stopped
by French cavalry sentinels.
A French noncommissioned officer of hussars, in crimson uniform and a
shaggy cap, shouted to the approaching Balashev to halt. Balashev did not do
so at once, but continued to advance along the road at a walking pace.
The noncommissioned officer frowned and, muttering words of abuse,
advanced his horse's chest against Balashev, put his hand to his saber, and
shouted rudely at the Russian general, asking: was he deaf that he did not do
as he was told? Balashev mentioned who he was. The noncommissioned
officer began talking with his comrades about regimental matters without
looking at the Russian general.
After living at the seat of the highest authority and power, after conversing
with the Emperor less than three hours before, and in general being
accustomed to the respect due to his rank in the service, Balashev found it
very strange here on Russian soil to encounter this hostile, and still more this
disrespectful, application of brute force to himself.
The sun was only just appearing from behind the clouds, the air was fresh and
dewy. A herd of cattle was being driven along the road from the village, and
over the fields the larks rose trilling, one after another, like bubbles rising in
water.
Balashev looked around him, awaiting the arrival of an officer from the
village. The Russian Cossacks and bugler and the French hussars looked
silently at one another from time to time.
A French colonel of hussars, who had evidently just left his bed, came riding
from the village on a handsome sleek gray horse, accompanied by two hussars.
The officer, the soldiers, and their horses all looked smart and well kept.
It was that first period of a campaign when troops are still in full trim, almost
like that of peacetime maneuvers, but with a shade of martial swagger in their
clothes, and a touch of the gaiety and spirit of enterprise which always
accompany the opening of a campaign.
The French colonel with difficulty repressed a yawn, but was polite and
evidently understood Balashev's importance. He led him past his soldiers and
behind the outposts and told him that his wish to be presented to the Emperor
would most likely be satisfied immediately, as the Emperor's quarters were, he
believed, not far off.
They rode through the village of Rykonty, past tethered French hussar horses,
past sentinels and men who saluted their colonel and stared with curiosity at a
Russian uniform, and came out at the other end of the village. The colonel said
that the commander of the division was a mile and a quarter away and would
receive Balashev and conduct him to his destination.
The sun had by now risen and shone gaily on the bright verdure.
They had hardly ridden up a hill, past a tavern, before they saw a group of
horsemen coming toward them. In front of the group, on a black horse with
trappings that glittered in the sun, rode a tall man with plumes in his hat and
black hair curling down to his shoulders. He wore a red mantle, and stretched
his long legs forward in French fashion. This man rode toward Balashev at a
gallop, his plumes flowing and his gems and gold lace glittering in the bright
June sunshine.
Balashev was only two horses' length from the equestrian with the bracelets,
plumes, necklaces, and gold embroidery, who was galloping toward him with
a theatrically solemn countenance, when Julner, the French colonel, whispered
respectfully: "The King of Naples!" It was, in fact, Murat, now called "King of
Naples." Though it was quite incomprehensible why he should be King of
Naples, he was called so, and was himself convinced that he was so, and
therefore assumed a more solemn and important air than formerly. He was so
sure that he really was the King of Naples that when, on the eve of his
departure from that city, while walking through the streets with his wife, some
Italians called out to him: "Viva il re!" * he turned to his wife with a pensive
smile and said: "Poor fellows, they don't know that I am leaving them
tomorrow!"
* "Long live the king."
But though he firmly believed himself to be King of Naples and pitied the
grief felt by the subjects he was abandoning, latterly, after he had been ordered
to return to military service—and especially since his last interview with
Napoleon in Danzig, when his august brother-in-law had told him: "I made
you King that you should reign in my way, but not in yours!"—he had
cheerfully taken up his familiar business, and—like a well-fed but not overfat
horse that feels himself in harness and grows skittish between the shafts—he
dressed up in clothes as variegated and expensive as possible, and gaily and
contentedly galloped along the roads of Poland, without himself knowing why
or whither.
On seeing the Russian general he threw back his head, with its long hair
curling to his shoulders, in a majestically royal manner, and looked inquiringly
at the French colonel. The colonel respectfully informed His Majesty of
Balashev's mission, whose name he could not pronounce.
"De Bal-macheve!" said the King (overcoming by his assurance the difficulty
that had presented itself to the colonel). "Charmed to make your acquaintance,
General!" he added, with a gesture of kingly condescension.
As soon as the King began to speak loud and fast his royal dignity instantly
forsook him, and without noticing it he passed into his natural tone of good-
natured familiarity. He laid his hand on the withers of Balashev's horse and
said:
"Well, General, it all looks like war," as if regretting a circumstance of which
he was unable to judge.
"Your Majesty," replied Balashev, "my master, the Emperor, does not desire
war and as Your Majesty sees..." said Balashev, using the words Your Majesty
at every opportunity, with the affectation unavoidable in frequently addressing
one to whom the title was still a novelty.
Murat's face beamed with stupid satisfaction as he listened to "Monsieur de
Bal-macheve." But royaute oblige! * and he felt it incumbent on him, as a king
and an ally, to confer on state affairs with Alexander's envoy. He dismounted,
took Balashev's arm, and moving a few steps away from his suite, which
waited respectfully, began to pace up and down with him, trying to speak
significantly. He referred to the fact that the Emperor Napoleon had resented
the demand that he should withdraw his troops from Prussia, especially when
that demand became generally known and the dignity of France was thereby
offended.
* "Royalty has its obligations."
Balashev replied that there was "nothing offensive in the demand, because..."
but Murat interrupted him.
"Then you don't consider the Emperor Alexander the aggressor?" he asked
unexpectedly, with a kindly and foolish smile.
Balashev told him why he considered Napoleon to be the originator of the war.
"Oh, my dear general!" Murat again interrupted him, "with all my heart I wish
the Emperors may arrange the affair between them, and that the war begun by
no wish of mine may finish as quickly as possible!" said he, in the tone of a
servant who wants to remain good friends with another despite a quarrel
between their masters.
And he went on to inquiries about the Grand Duke and the state of his health,
and to reminiscences of the gay and amusing times he had spent with him in
Naples. Then suddenly, as if remembering his royal dignity, Murat solemnly
drew himself up, assumed the pose in which he had stood at his coronation,
and, waving his right arm, said:
"I won't detain you longer, General. I wish success to your mission," and with
his embroidered red mantle, his flowing feathers, and his glittering ornaments,
he rejoined his suite who were respectfully awaiting him.
Balashev rode on, supposing from Murat's words that he would very soon be
brought before Napoleon himself. But instead of that, at the next village the
sentinels of Davout's infantry corps detained him as the pickets of the
vanguard had done, and an adjutant of the corps commander, who was fetched,
conducted him into the village to Marshal Davout.
CHAPTER V
Davout was to Napoleon what Arakcheev was to Alexander—though not a
coward like Arakcheev, he was as precise, as cruel, and as unable to express
his devotion to his monarch except by cruelty.
In the organism of states such men are necessary, as wolves are necessary in
the organism of nature, and they always exist, always appear and hold their
own, however incongruous their presence and their proximity to the head of
the government may be. This inevitability alone can explain how the cruel
Arakcheev, who tore out a grenadier's mustache with his own hands, whose
weak nerves rendered him unable to face danger, and who was neither an
educated man nor a courtier, was able to maintain his powerful position with
Alexander, whose own character was chivalrous, noble, and gentle.
Balashev found Davout seated on a barrel in the shed of a peasant's hut,
writing—he was auditing accounts. Better quarters could have been found
him, but Marshal Davout was one of those men who purposely put themselves
in most depressing conditions to have a justification for being gloomy. For the
same reason they are always hard at work and in a hurry. "How can I think of
the bright side of life when, as you see, I am sitting on a barrel and working in
a dirty shed?" the expression of his face seemed to say. The chief pleasure and
necessity of such men, when they encounter anyone who shows animation, is
to flaunt their own dreary, persistent activity. Davout allowed himself that
pleasure when Balashev was brought in. He became still more absorbed in his
task when the Russian general entered, and after glancing over his spectacles
at Balashev's face, which was animated by the beauty of the morning and by
his talk with Murat, he did not rise or even stir, but scowled still more and
sneered malevolently.
When he noticed in Balashev's face the disagreeable impression this reception
produced, Davout raised his head and coldly asked what he wanted.
Thinking he could have been received in such a manner only because Davout
did not know that he was adjutant general to the Emperor Alexander and even
his envoy to Napoleon, Balashev hastened to inform him of his rank and
mission. Contrary to his expectation, Davout, after hearing him, became still
surlier and ruder.
"Where is your dispatch?" he inquired. "Give it to me. I will send it to the
Emperor."
Balashev replied that he had been ordered to hand it personally to the
Emperor.
"Your Emperor's orders are obeyed in your army, but here," said Davout, "you
must do as you're told."
And, as if to make the Russian general still more conscious of his dependence
on brute force, Davout sent an adjutant to call the officer on duty.
Balashev took out the packet containing the Emperor's letter and laid it on the
table (made of a door with its hinges still hanging on it, laid across two
barrels). Davout took the packet and read the inscription.
"You are perfectly at liberty to treat me with respect or not," protested
Balashev, "but permit me to observe that I have the honor to be adjutant
general to His Majesty...."
Davout glanced at him silently and plainly derived pleasure from the signs of
agitation and confusion which appeared on Balashev's face.
"You will be treated as is fitting," said he and, putting the packet in his pocket,
left the shed.
A minute later the marshal's adjutant, de Castres, came in and conducted
Balashev to the quarters assigned him.
That day he dined with the marshal, at the same board on the barrels.
Next day Davout rode out early and, after asking Balashev to come to him,
peremptorily requested him to remain there, to move on with the baggage train
should orders come for it to move, and to talk to no one except Monsieur de
Castres.
After four days of solitude, ennui, and consciousness of his impotence and
insignificance—particularly acute by contrast with the sphere of power in
which he had so lately moved—and after several marches with the marshal's
baggage and the French army, which occupied the whole district, Balashev
was brought to Vilna—now occupied by the French—through the very gate by
which he had left it four days previously.
Next day the imperial gentleman-in-waiting, the Comte de Turenne, came to
Balashev and informed him of the Emperor Napoleon's wish to honor him
with an audience.
Four days before, sentinels of the Preobrazhensk regiment had stood in front
of the house to which Balashev was conducted, and now two French
grenadiers stood there in blue uniforms unfastened in front and with shaggy
caps on their heads, and an escort of hussars and uhlans and a brilliant suite of
aides-de-camp, pages, and generals, who were waiting for Napoleon to come
out, were standing at the porch, round his saddle horse and his Mameluke,
Rustan. Napoleon received Balashev in the very house in Vilna from which
Alexander had dispatched him on his mission.
CHAPTER VI
Though Balashev was used to imperial pomp, he was amazed at the luxury and
magnificence of Napoleon's court.
The Comte de Turenne showed him into a big reception room where many
generals, gentlemen-in-waiting, and Polish magnates—several of whom
Balashev had seen at the court of the Emperor of Russia—were waiting.
Duroc said that Napoleon would receive the Russian general before going for
his ride.
After some minutes, the gentleman-in-waiting who was on duty came into the
great reception room and, bowing politely, asked Balashev to follow him.
Balashev went into a small reception room, one door of which led into a study,
the very one from which the Russian Emperor had dispatched him on his
mission. He stood a minute or two, waiting. He heard hurried footsteps beyond
the door, both halves of it were opened rapidly; all was silent and then from
the study the sound was heard of other steps, firm and resolute—they were
those of Napoleon. He had just finished dressing for his ride, and wore a blue
uniform, opening in front over a white waistcoat so long that it covered his
rotund stomach, white leather breeches tightly fitting the fat thighs of his short
legs, and Hessian boots. His short hair had evidently just been brushed, but
one lock hung down in the middle of his broad forehead. His plump white
neck stood out sharply above the black collar of his uniform, and he smelled
of Eau de Cologne. His full face, rather young-looking, with its prominent
chin, wore a gracious and majestic expression of imperial welcome.
He entered briskly, with a jerk at every step and his head slightly thrown back.
His whole short corpulent figure with broad thick shoulders, and chest and
stomach involuntarily protruding, had that imposing and stately appearance
one sees in men of forty who live in comfort. It was evident, too, that he was
in the best of spirits that day.
He nodded in answer to Balashav's low and respectful bow, and coming up to
him at once began speaking like a man who values every moment of his time
and does not condescend to prepare what he has to say but is sure he will
always say the right thing and say it well.
"Good day, General!" said he. "I have received the letter you brought from the
Emperor Alexander and am very glad to see you." He glanced with his large
eyes into Balashav's face and immediately looked past him.
It was plain that Balashev's personality did not interest him at all. Evidently
only what took place within his own mind interested him. Nothing outside
himself had any significance for him, because everything in the world, it
seemed to him, depended entirely on his will.
"I do not, and did not, desire war," he continued, "but it has been forced on
me. Even now" (he emphasized the word) "I am ready to receive any
explanations you can give me."
And he began clearly and concisely to explain his reasons for dissatisfaction
with the Russian government. Judging by the calmly moderate and amicable
tone in which the French Emperor spoke, Balashev was firmly persuaded that
he wished for peace and intended to enter into negotiations.
When Napoleon, having finished speaking, looked inquiringly at the Russian
envoy, Balashev began a speech he had prepared long before: "Sire! The
Emperor, my master..." but the sight of the Emperor's eyes bent on him
confused him. "You are flurried—compose yourself!" Napoleon seemed to
say, as with a scarcely perceptible smile he looked at Balashev's uniform and
sword.
Balashev recovered himself and began to speak. He said that the Emperor
Alexander did not consider Kurakin's demand for his passports a sufficient
cause for war; that Kurakin had acted on his own initiative and without his
sovereign's assent, that the Emperor Alexander did not desire war, and had no
relations with England.
"Not yet!" interposed Napoleon, and, as if fearing to give vent to his feelings,
he frowned and nodded slightly as a sign that Balashev might proceed.
After saying all he had been instructed to say, Balashev added that the
Emperor Alexander wished for peace, but would not enter into negotiations
except on condition that... Here Balashev hesitated: he remembered the words
the Emperor Alexander had not written in his letter, but had specially inserted
in the rescript to Saltykov and had told Balashev to repeat to Napoleon.
Balashev remembered these words, "So long as a single armed foe remains on
Russian soil," but some complex feeling restrained him. He could not utter
them, though he wished to do so. He grew confused and said: "On condition
that the French army retires beyond the Niemen."
Napoleon noticed Balashev's embarrassment when uttering these last words;
his face twitched and the calf of his left leg began to quiver rhythmically.
Without moving from where he stood he began speaking in a louder tone and
more hurriedly than before. During the speech that followed, Balashev, who
more than once lowered his eyes, involuntarily noticed the quivering of
Napoleon's left leg which increased the more Napoleon raised his voice.
"I desire peace, no less than the Emperor Alexander," he began. "Have I not
for eighteen months been doing everything to obtain it? I have waited eighteen
months for explanations. But in order to begin negotiations, what is demanded
of me?" he said, frowning and making an energetic gesture of inquiry with his
small white plump hand.
"The withdrawal of your army beyond the Niemen, sire," replied Balashev.
"The Niemen?" repeated Napoleon. "So now you want me to retire beyond the
Niemen—only the Niemen?" repeated Napoleon, looking straight at Balashev.
The latter bowed his head respectfully.
Instead of the demand of four months earlier to withdraw from Pomerania,
only a withdrawal beyond the Niemen was now demanded. Napoleon turned
quickly and began to pace the room.
"You say the demand now is that I am to withdraw beyond the Niemen before
commencing negotiations, but in just the same way two months ago the
demand was that I should withdraw beyond the Vistula and the Oder, and yet
you are willing to negotiate."
He went in silence from one corner of the room to the other and again stopped
in front of Balashev. Balashev noticed that his left leg was quivering faster
than before and his face seemed petrified in its stern expression. This
quivering of his left leg was a thing Napoleon was conscious of. "The
vibration of my left calf is a great sign with me," he remarked at a later date.
"Such demands as to retreat beyond the Vistula and Oder may be made to a
Prince of Baden, but not to me!" Napoleon almost screamed, quite to his own
surprise. "If you gave me Petersburg and Moscow I could not accept such
conditions. You say I have begun this war! But who first joined his army? The
Emperor Alexander, not I! And you offer me negotiations when I have
expended millions, when you are in alliance with England, and when your
position is a bad one. You offer me negotiations! But what is the aim of your
alliance with England? What has she given you?" he continued hurriedly,
evidently no longer trying to show the advantages of peace and discuss its
possibility, but only to prove his own rectitude and power and Alexander's
errors and duplicity.
The commencement of his speech had obviously been made with the intention
of demonstrating the advantages of his position and showing that he was
nevertheless willing to negotiate. But he had begun talking, and the more he
talked the less could he control his words.
The whole purport of his remarks now was evidently to exalt himself and
insult Alexander—just what he had least desired at the commencement of the
interview.
"I hear you have made peace with Turkey?"
Balashev bowed his head affirmatively.
"Peace has been concluded..." he began.
But Napoleon did not let him speak. He evidently wanted to do all the talking
himself, and continued to talk with the sort of eloquence and unrestrained
irritability to which spoiled people are so prone.
"Yes, I know you have made peace with the Turks without obtaining Moldavia
and Wallachia; I would have given your sovereign those provinces as I gave
him Finland. Yes," he went on, "I promised and would have given the Emperor
Alexander Moldavia and Wallachia, and now he won't have those splendid
provinces. Yet he might have united them to his empire and in a single reign
would have extended Russia from the Gulf of Bothnia to the mouths of the
Danube. Catherine the Great could not have done more," said Napoleon,
growing more and more excited as he paced up and down the room, repeating
to Balashev almost the very words he had used to Alexander himself at Tilsit.
"All that, he would have owed to my friendship. Oh, what a splendid reign!"
he repeated several times, then paused, drew from his pocket a gold snuffbox,
lifted it to his nose, and greedily sniffed at it.
"What a splendid reign the Emperor Alexander's might have been!"
He looked compassionately at Balashev, and as soon as the latter tried to make
some rejoinder hastily interrupted him.
"What could he wish or look for that he would not have obtained through my
friendship?" demanded Napoleon, shrugging his shoulders in perplexity. "But
no, he has preferred to surround himself with my enemies, and with whom?
With Steins, Armfeldts, Bennigsens, and Wintzingerodes! Stein, a traitor
expelled from his own country; Armfeldt, a rake and an intriguer;
Wintzingerode, a fugitive French subject; Bennigsen, rather more of a soldier
than the others, but all the same an incompetent who was unable to do
anything in 1807 and who should awaken terrible memories in the Emperor
Alexander's mind.... Granted that were they competent they might be made use
of," continued Napoleon—hardly able to keep pace in words with the rush of
thoughts that incessantly sprang up, proving how right and strong he was (in
his perception the two were one and the same)—"but they are not even that!
They are neither fit for war nor peace! Barclay is said to be the most capable
of them all, but I cannot say so, judging by his first movements. And what are
they doing, all these courtiers? Pfuel proposes, Armfeldt disputes, Bennigsen
considers, and Barclay, called on to act, does not know what to decide on, and
time passes bringing no result. Bagration alone is a military man. He's stupid,
but he has experience, a quick eye, and resolution.... And what role is your
young monarch playing in that monstrous crowd? They compromise him and
throw on him the responsibility for all that happens. A sovereign should not be
with the army unless he is a general!" said Napoleon, evidently uttering these
words as a direct challenge to the Emperor. He knew how Alexander desired
to be a military commander.
"The campaign began only a week ago, and you haven't even been able to
defend Vilna. You are cut in two and have been driven out of the Polish
provinces. Your army is grumbling."
"On the contrary, Your Majesty," said Balashev, hardly able to remember what
had been said to him and following these verbal fireworks with difficulty, "the
troops are burning with eagerness..."
"I know everything!" Napoleon interrupted him. "I know everything. I know
the number of your battalions as exactly as I know my own. You have not two
hundred thousand men, and I have three times that number. I give you my
word of honor," said Napoleon, forgetting that his word of honor could carry
no weight—"I give you my word of honor that I have five hundred and thirty
thousand men this side of the Vistula. The Turks will be of no use to you; they
are worth nothing and have shown it by making peace with you. As for the
Swedes—it is their fate to be governed by mad kings. Their king was insane
and they changed him for another—Bernadotte, who promptly went mad—for
no Swede would ally himself with Russia unless he were mad."
Napoleon grinned maliciously and again raised his snuffbox to his nose.
Balashev knew how to reply to each of Napoleon's remarks, and would have
done so; he continually made the gesture of a man wishing to say something,
but Napoleon always interrupted him. To the alleged insanity of the Swedes,
Balashev wished to reply that when Russia is on her side Sweden is practically
an island: but Napoleon gave an angry exclamation to drown his voice.
Napoleon was in that state of irritability in which a man has to talk, talk, and
talk, merely to convince himself that he is in the right. Balashev began to feel
uncomfortable: as envoy he feared to demean his dignity and felt the necessity
of replying; but, as a man, he shrank before the transport of groundless wrath
that had evidently seized Napoleon. He knew that none of the words now
uttered by Napoleon had any significance, and that Napoleon himself would
be ashamed of them when he came to his senses. Balashev stood with
downcast eyes, looking at the movements of Napoleon's stout legs and trying
to avoid meeting his eyes.
"But what do I care about your allies?" said Napoleon. "I have allies—the
Poles. There are eighty thousand of them and they fight like lions. And there
will be two hundred thousand of them."
And probably still more perturbed by the fact that he had uttered this obvious
falsehood, and that Balashev still stood silently before him in the same attitude
of submission to fate, Napoleon abruptly turned round, drew close to
Balashev's face, and, gesticulating rapidly and energetically with his white
hands, almost shouted:
"Know that if you stir up Prussia against me, I'll wipe it off the map of
Europe!" he declared, his face pale and distorted by anger, and he struck one
of his small hands energetically with the other. "Yes, I will throw you back
beyond the Dvina and beyond the Dnieper, and will re-erect against you that
barrier which it was criminal and blind of Europe to allow to be destroyed.
Yes, that is what will happen to you. That is what you have gained by
alienating me!" And he walked silently several times up and down the room,
his fat shoulders twitching.
He put his snuffbox into his waistcoat pocket, took it out again, lifted it several
times to his nose, and stopped in front of Balashev. He paused, looked
ironically straight into Balashev's eyes, and said in a quiet voice:
"And yet what a splendid reign your master might have had!"
Balashev, feeling it incumbent on him to reply, said that from the Russian side
things did not appear in so gloomy a light. Napoleon was silent, still looking
derisively at him and evidently not listening to him. Balashev said that in
Russia the best results were expected from the war. Napoleon nodded
condescendingly, as if to say, "I know it's your duty to say that, but you don't
believe it yourself. I have convinced you."
When Balashev had ended, Napoleon again took out his snuffbox, sniffed at it,
and stamped his foot twice on the floor as a signal. The door opened, a
gentleman-in-waiting, bending respectfully, handed the Emperor his hat and
gloves; another brought him a pocket handkerchief. Napoleon, without giving
them a glance, turned to Balashev:
"Assure the Emperor Alexander from me," said he, taking his hat, "that I am
as devoted to him as before: I know him thoroughly and very highly esteem
his lofty qualities. I will detain you no longer, General; you shall receive my
letter to the Emperor."
And Napoleon went quickly to the door. Everyone in the reception room
rushed forward and descended the staircase.
CHAPTER VII
After all that Napoleon had said to him—those bursts of anger and the last
dryly spoken words: "I will detain you no longer, General; you shall receive
my letter," Balashev felt convinced that Napoleon would not wish to see him,
and would even avoid another meeting with him—an insulted envoy—
especially as he had witnessed his unseemly anger. But, to his surprise,
Balashev received, through Duroc, an invitation to dine with the Emperor that
day.
Bessieres, Caulaincourt, and Berthier were present at that dinner.
Napoleon met Balashev cheerfully and amiably. He not only showed no sign
of constraint or self-reproach on account of his outburst that morning, but, on
the contrary, tried to reassure Balashev. It was evident that he had long been
convinced that it was impossible for him to make a mistake, and that in his
perception whatever he did was right, not because it harmonized with any idea
of right and wrong, but because he did it.
The Emperor was in very good spirits after his ride through Vilna, where
crowds of people had rapturously greeted and followed him. From all the
windows of the streets through which he rode, rugs, flags, and his monogram
were displayed, and the Polish ladies, welcoming him, waved their
handkerchiefs to him.
At dinner, having placed Balashev beside him, Napoleon not only treated him
amiably but behaved as if Balashev were one of his own courtiers, one of
those who sympathized with his plans and ought to rejoice at his success. In
the course of conversation he mentioned Moscow and questioned Balashev
about the Russian capital, not merely as an interested traveler asks about a new
city he intends to visit, but as if convinced that Balashev, as a Russian, must be
flattered by his curiosity.
"How many inhabitants are there in Moscow? How many houses? Is it true
that Moscow is called 'Holy Moscow'? How many churches are there in
Moscow?" he asked.
And receiving the reply that there were more than two hundred churches, he
remarked:
"Why such a quantity of churches?"
"The Russians are very devout," replied Balashev.
"But a large number of monasteries and churches is always a sign of the
backwardness of a people," said Napoleon, turning to Caulaincourt for
appreciation of this remark.
Balashev respectfully ventured to disagree with the French Emperor.
"Every country has its own character," said he.
"But nowhere in Europe is there anything like that," said Napoleon.
"I beg your Majesty's pardon," returned Balashev, "besides Russia there is
Spain, where there are also many churches and monasteries."
This reply of Balashev's, which hinted at the recent defeats of the French in
Spain, was much appreciated when he related it at Alexander's court, but it
was not much appreciated at Napoleon's dinner, where it passed unnoticed.
The uninterested and perplexed faces of the marshals showed that they were
puzzled as to what Balashev's tone suggested. "If there is a point we don't see
it, or it is not at all witty," their expressions seemed to say. So little was his
rejoinder appreciated that Napoleon did not notice it at all and naively asked
Balashev through what towns the direct road from there to Moscow passed.
Balashev, who was on the alert all through the dinner, replied that just as "all
roads lead to Rome," so all roads lead to Moscow: there were many roads, and
"among them the road through Poltava, which Charles XII chose." Balashev
involuntarily flushed with pleasure at the aptitude of this reply, but hardly had
he uttered the word Poltava before Caulaincourt began speaking of the
badness of the road from Petersburg to Moscow and of his Petersburg
reminiscences.
After dinner they went to drink coffee in Napoleon's study, which four days
previously had been that of the Emperor Alexander. Napoleon sat down,
toying with his Sevres coffee cup, and motioned Balashev to a chair beside
him.
Napoleon was in that well-known after-dinner mood which, more than any
reasoned cause, makes a man contented with himself and disposed to consider
everyone his friend. It seemed to him that he was surrounded by men who
adored him: and he felt convinced that, after his dinner, Balashev too was his
friend and worshiper. Napoleon turned to him with a pleasant, though slightly
ironic, smile.
"They tell me this is the room the Emperor Alexander occupied? Strange, isn't
it, General?" he said, evidently not doubting that this remark would be
agreeable to his hearer since it went to prove his, Napoleon's, superiority to
Alexander.
Balashev made no reply and bowed his head in silence.
"Yes. Four days ago in this room, Wintzingerode and Stein were deliberating,"
continued Napoleon with the same derisive and self-confident smile. "What I
can't understand," he went on, "is that the Emperor Alexander has surrounded
himself with my personal enemies. That I do not... understand. Has he not
thought that I may do the same?" and he turned inquiringly to Balashev, and
evidently this thought turned him back on to the track of his morning's anger,
which was still fresh in him.
"And let him know that I will do so!" said Napoleon, rising and pushing his
cup away with his hand. "I'll drive all his Wurttemberg, Baden, and Weimar
relations out of Germany.... Yes. I'll drive them out. Let him prepare an asylum
for them in Russia!"
Balashev bowed his head with an air indicating that he would like to make his
bow and leave, and only listened because he could not help hearing what was
said to him. Napoleon did not notice this expression; he treated Balashev not
as an envoy from his enemy, but as a man now fully devoted to him and who
must rejoice at his former master's humiliation.
"And why has the Emperor Alexander taken command of the armies? What is
the good of that? War is my profession, but his business is to reign and not to
command armies! Why has he taken on himself such a responsibility?"
Again Napoleon brought out his snuffbox, paced several times up and down
the room in silence, and then, suddenly and unexpectedly, went up to Balashev
and with a slight smile, as confidently, quickly, and simply as if he were doing
something not merely important but pleasing to Balashev, he raised his hand to
the forty-year-old Russian general's face and, taking him by the ear, pulled it
gently, smiling with his lips only.
To have one's ear pulled by the Emperor was considered the greatest honor
and mark of favor at the French court.
"Well, adorer and courtier of the Emperor Alexander, why don't you say
anything?" said he, as if it was ridiculous, in his presence, to be the adorer and
courtier of anyone but himself, Napoleon. "Are the horses ready for the
general?" he added, with a slight inclination of his head in reply to Balashev's
bow. "Let him have mine, he has a long way to go!"
The letter taken by Balashev was the last Napoleon sent to Alexander. Every
detail of the interview was communicated to the Russian monarch, and the war
began...
CHAPTER VIII
After his interview with Pierre in Moscow, Prince Andrew went to Petersburg,
on business as he told his family, but really to meet Anatole Kuragin whom he
felt it necessary to encounter. On reaching Petersburg he inquired for Kuragin
but the latter had already left the city. Pierre had warned his brother-in-law
that Prince Andrew was on his track. Anatole Kuragin promptly obtained an
appointment from the Minister of War and went to join the army in Moldavia.
While in Petersburg Prince Andrew met Kutuzov, his former commander who
was always well disposed toward him, and Kutuzov suggested that he should
accompany him to the army in Moldavia, to which the old general had been
appointed commander-in-chief. So Prince Andrew, having received an
appointment on the headquarters staff, left for Turkey.
Prince Andrew did not think it proper to write and challenge Kuragin. He
thought that if he challenged him without some fresh cause it might
compromise the young Countess Rostova and so he wanted to meet Kuragin
personally in order to find a fresh pretext for a duel. But he again failed to
meet Kuragin in Turkey, for soon after Prince Andrew arrived, the latter
returned to Russia. In a new country, amid new conditions, Prince Andrew
found life easier to bear. After his betrothed had broken faith with him—which
he felt the more acutely the more he tried to conceal its effects—the
surroundings in which he had been happy became trying to him, and the
freedom and independence he had once prized so highly were still more so.
Not only could he no longer think the thoughts that had first come to him as he
lay gazing at the sky on the field of Austerlitz and had later enlarged upon
with Pierre, and which had filled his solitude at Bogucharovo and then in
Switzerland and Rome, but he even dreaded to recall them and the bright and
boundless horizons they had revealed. He was now concerned only with the
nearest practical matters unrelated to his past interests, and he seized on these
the more eagerly the more those past interests were closed to him. It was as if
that lofty, infinite canopy of heaven that had once towered above him had
suddenly turned into a low, solid vault that weighed him down, in which all
was clear, but nothing eternal or mysterious.
Of the activities that presented themselves to him, army service was the
simplest and most familiar. As a general on duty on Kutuzov's staff, he applied
himself to business with zeal and perseverance and surprised Kutuzov by his
willingness and accuracy in work. Not having found Kuragin in Turkey, Prince
Andrew did not think it necessary to rush back to Russia after him, but all the
same he knew that however long it might be before he met Kuragin, despite
his contempt for him and despite all the proofs he deduced to convince himself
that it was not worth stooping to a conflict with him—he knew that when he
did meet him he would not be able to resist calling him out, any more than a
ravenous man can help snatching at food. And the consciousness that the
insult was not yet avenged, that his rancor was still unspent, weighed on his
heart and poisoned the artificial tranquillity which he managed to obtain in
Turkey by means of restless, plodding, and rather vainglorious and ambitious
activity.
In the year 1812, when news of the war with Napoleon reached Bucharest—
where Kutuzov had been living for two months, passing his days and nights
with a Wallachian woman—Prince Andrew asked Kutuzov to transfer him to
the Western Army. Kutuzov, who was already weary of Bolkonski's activity
which seemed to reproach his own idleness, very readily let him go and gave
him a mission to Barclay de Tolly.
Before joining the Western Army which was then, in May, encamped at
Drissa, Prince Andrew visited Bald Hills which was directly on his way, being
only two miles off the Smolensk highroad. During the last three years there
had been so many changes in his life, he had thought, felt, and seen so much
(having traveled both in the east and the west), that on reaching Bald Hills it
struck him as strange and unexpected to find the way of life there unchanged
and still the same in every detail. He entered through the gates with their stone
pillars and drove up the avenue leading to the house as if he were entering an
enchanted, sleeping castle. The same old stateliness, the same cleanliness, the
same stillness reigned there, and inside there was the same furniture, the same
walls, sounds, and smell, and the same timid faces, only somewhat older.
Princess Mary was still the same timid, plain maiden getting on in years,
uselessly and joylessly passing the best years of her life in fear and constant
suffering. Mademoiselle Bourienne was the same coquettish, self-satisfied girl,
enjoying every moment of her existence and full of joyous hopes for the
future. She had merely become more self-confident, Prince Andrew thought.
Dessalles, the tutor he had brought from Switzerland, was wearing a coat of
Russian cut and talking broken Russian to the servants, but was still the same
narrowly intelligent, conscientious, and pedantic preceptor. The old prince had
changed in appearance only by the loss of a tooth, which left a noticeable gap
on one side of his mouth; in character he was the same as ever, only showing
still more irritability and skepticism as to what was happening in the world.
Little Nicholas alone had changed. He had grown, become rosier, had curly
dark hair, and, when merry and laughing, quite unconsciously lifted the upper
lip of his pretty little mouth just as the little princess used to do. He alone did
not obey the law of immutability in the enchanted, sleeping castle. But though
externally all remained as of old, the inner relations of all these people had
changed since Prince Andrew had seen them last. The household was divided
into two alien and hostile camps, who changed their habits for his sake and
only met because he was there. To the one camp belonged the old prince,
Mademoiselle Bourienne, and the architect; to the other Princess Mary,
Dessalles, little Nicholas, and all the old nurses and maids.
During his stay at Bald Hills all the family dined together, but they were ill at
ease and Prince Andrew felt that he was a visitor for whose sake an exception
was being made and that his presence made them all feel awkward.
Involuntarily feeling this at dinner on the first day, he was taciturn, and the old
prince noticing this also became morosely dumb and retired to his apartments
directly after dinner. In the evening, when Prince Andrew went to him and,
trying to rouse him, began to tell him of the young Count Kamensky's
campaign, the old prince began unexpectedly to talk about Princess Mary,
blaming her for her superstitions and her dislike of Mademoiselle Bourienne,
who, he said, was the only person really attached to him.
The old prince said that if he was ill it was only because of Princess Mary: that
she purposely worried and irritated him, and that by indulgence and silly talk
she was spoiling little Prince Nicholas. The old prince knew very well that he
tormented his daughter and that her life was very hard, but he also knew that
he could not help tormenting her and that she deserved it. "Why does Prince
Andrew, who sees this, say nothing to me about his sister? Does he think me a
scoundrel, or an old fool who, without any reason, keeps his own daughter at a
distance and attaches this Frenchwoman to himself? He doesn't understand, so
I must explain it, and he must hear me out," thought the old prince. And he
began explaining why he could not put up with his daughter's unreasonable
character.
"If you ask me," said Prince Andrew, without looking up (he was censuring his
father for the first time in his life), "I did not wish to speak about it, but as you
ask me I will give you my frank opinion. If there is any misunderstanding and
discord between you and Mary, I can't blame her for it at all. I know how she
loves and respects you. Since you ask me," continued Prince Andrew,
becoming irritable—as he was always liable to do of late—"I can only say that
if there are any misunderstandings they are caused by that worthless woman,
who is not fit to be my sister's companion."
The old man at first stared fixedly at his son, and an unnatural smile disclosed
the fresh gap between his teeth to which Prince Andrew could not get
accustomed.
"What companion, my dear boy? Eh? You've already been talking it over!
Eh?"
"Father, I did not want to judge," said Prince Andrew, in a hard and bitter tone,
"but you challenged me, and I have said, and always shall say, that Mary is not
to blame, but those to blame—the one to blame—is that Frenchwoman."
"Ah, he has passed judgment... passed judgement!" said the old man in a low
voice and, as it seemed to Prince Andrew, with some embarrassment, but then
he suddenly jumped up and cried: "Be off, be off! Let not a trace of you
remain here!..."
Prince Andrew wished to leave at once, but Princess Mary persuaded him to
stay another day. That day he did not see his father, who did not leave his
room and admitted no one but Mademoiselle Bourienne and Tikhon, but asked
several times whether his son had gone. Next day, before leaving, Prince
Andrew went to his son's rooms. The boy, curly-headed like his mother and
glowing with health, sat on his knee, and Prince Andrew began telling him the
story of Bluebeard, but fell into a reverie without finishing the story. He
thought not of this pretty child, his son whom he held on his knee, but of
himself. He sought in himself either remorse for having angered his father or
regret at leaving home for the first time in his life on bad terms with him, and
was horrified to find neither. What meant still more to him was that he sought
and did not find in himself the former tenderness for his son which he had
hoped to reawaken by caressing the boy and taking him on his knee.
"Well, go on!" said his son.
Prince Andrew, without replying, put him down from his knee and went out of
the room.
As soon as Prince Andrew had given up his daily occupations, and especially
on returning to the old conditions of life amid which he had been happy,
weariness of life overcame him with its former intensity, and he hastened to
escape from these memories and to find some work as soon as possible.
"So you've decided to go, Andrew?" asked his sister.
"Thank God that I can," replied Prince Andrew. "I am very sorry you can't."
"Why do you say that?" replied Princess Mary. "Why do you say that, when
you are going to this terrible war, and he is so old? Mademoiselle Bourienne
says he has been asking about you...."
As soon as she began to speak of that, her lips trembled and her tears began to
fall. Prince Andrew turned away and began pacing the room.
"Ah, my God! my God! When one thinks who and what—what trash—can
cause people misery!" he said with a malignity that alarmed Princess Mary.
She understood that when speaking of "trash" he referred not only to
Mademoiselle Bourienne, the cause of her misery, but also to the man who had
ruined his own happiness.
"Andrew! One thing I beg, I entreat of you!" she said, touching his elbow and
looking at him with eyes that shone through her tears. "I understand you" (she
looked down). "Don't imagine that sorrow is the work of men. Men are His
tools." She looked a little above Prince Andrew's head with the confident,
accustomed look with which one looks at the place where a familiar portrait
hangs. "Sorrow is sent by Him, not by men. Men are His instruments, they are
not to blame. If you think someone has wronged you, forget it and forgive! We
have no right to punish. And then you will know the happiness of forgiving."
"If I were a woman I would do so, Mary. That is a woman's virtue. But a man
should not and cannot forgive and forget," he replied, and though till that
moment he had not been thinking of Kuragin, all his unexpended anger
suddenly swelled up in his heart.
"If Mary is already persuading me to forgive, it means that I ought long ago to
have punished him," he thought. And giving her no further reply, he began
thinking of the glad vindictive moment when he would meet Kuragin who he
knew was now in the army.
Princess Mary begged him to stay one day more, saying that she knew how
unhappy her father would be if Andrew left without being reconciled to him,
but Prince Andrew replied that he would probably soon be back again from
the army and would certainly write to his father, but that the longer he stayed
now the more embittered their differences would become.
"Good-bye, Andrew! Remember that misfortunes come from God, and men
are never to blame," were the last words he heard from his sister when he took
leave of her.
"Then it must be so!" thought Prince Andrew as he drove out of the avenue
from the house at Bald Hills. "She, poor innocent creature, is left to be
victimized by an old man who has outlived his wits. The old man feels he is
guilty, but cannot change himself. My boy is growing up and rejoices in life,
in which like everybody else he will deceive or be deceived. And I am off to
the army. Why? I myself don't know. I want to meet that man whom I despise,
so as to give him a chance to kill and laugh at me!"
These conditions of life had been the same before, but then they were all
connected, while now they had all tumbled to pieces. Only senseless things,
lacking coherence, presented themselves one after another to Prince Andrew's
mind.
CHAPTER IX
Prince Andrew reached the general headquarters of the army at the end of
June. The first army, with which was the Emperor, occupied the fortified camp
at Drissa; the second army was retreating, trying to effect a junction with the
first one from which it was said to be cut off by large French forces. Everyone
was dissatisfied with the general course of affairs in the Russian army, but no
one anticipated any danger of invasion of the Russian provinces, and no one
thought the war would extend farther than the western, the Polish, provinces.
Prince Andrew found Barclay de Tolly, to whom he had been assigned, on the
bank of the Drissa. As there was not a single town or large village in the
vicinity of the camp, the immense number of generals and courtiers
accompanying the army were living in the best houses of the villages on both
sides of the river, over a radius of six miles. Barclay de Tolly was quartered
nearly three miles from the Emperor. He received Bolkonski stiffly and coldly
and told him in his foreign accent that he would mention him to the Emperor
for a decision as to his employment, but asked him meanwhile to remain on
his staff. Anatole Kuragin, whom Prince Andrew had hoped to find with the
army, was not there. He had gone to Petersburg, but Prince Andrew was glad
to hear this. His mind was occupied by the interests of the center that was
conducting a gigantic war, and he was glad to be free for a while from the
distraction caused by the thought of Kuragin. During the first four days, while
no duties were required of him, Prince Andrew rode round the whole fortified
camp and, by the aid of his own knowledge and by talks with experts, tried to
form a definite opinion about it. But the question whether the camp was
advantageous or disadvantageous remained for him undecided. Already from
his military experience and what he had seen in the Austrian campaign, he had
come to the conclusion that in war the most deeply considered plans have no
significance and that all depends on the way unexpected movements of the
enemy—that cannot be foreseen—are met, and on how and by whom the
whole matter is handled. To clear up this last point for himself, Prince Andrew,
utilizing his position and acquaintances, tried to fathom the character of the
control of the army and of the men and parties engaged in it, and he deduced
for himself the following of the state of affairs.
While the Emperor had still been at Vilna, the forces had been divided into
three armies. First, the army under Barclay de Tolly, secondly, the army under
Bagration, and thirdly, the one commanded by Tormasov. The Emperor was
with the first army, but not as commander-in-chief. In the orders issued it was
stated, not that the Emperor would take command, but only that he would be
with the army. The Emperor, moreover, had with him not a commander-in-
chief's staff but the imperial headquarters staff. In attendance on him was the
head of the imperial staff, Quartermaster General Prince Volkonski, as well as
generals, imperial aides-de-camp, diplomatic officials, and a large number of
foreigners, but not the army staff. Besides these, there were in attendance on
the Emperor without any definite appointments: Arakcheev, the ex-Minister of
War; Count Bennigsen, the senior general in rank; the Grand Duke Tsarevich
Constantine Pavlovich; Count Rumyantsev, the Chancellor; Stein, a former
Prussian minister; Armfeldt, a Swedish general; Pfuel, the chief author of the
plan of campaign; Paulucci, an adjutant general and Sardinian emigre;
Wolzogen—and many others. Though these men had no military appointment
in the army, their position gave them influence, and often a corps commander,
or even the commander-in-chief, did not know in what capacity he was
questioned by Bennigsen, the Grand Duke, Arakcheev, or Prince Volkonski, or
was given this or that advice and did not know whether a certain order
received in the form of advice emanated from the man who gave it or from the
Emperor and whether it had to be executed or not. But this was only the
external condition; the essential significance of the presence of the Emperor
and of all these people, from a courtier's point of view (and in an Emperor's
vicinity all became courtiers), was clear to everyone. It was this: the Emperor
did not assume the title of commander-in-chief, but disposed of all the armies;
the men around him were his assistants. Arakcheev was a faithful custodian to
enforce order and acted as the sovereign's bodyguard. Bennigsen was a
landlord in the Vilna province who appeared to be doing the honors of the
district, but was in reality a good general, useful as an adviser and ready at
hand to replace Barclay. The Grand Duke was there because it suited him to
be. The ex-Minister Stein was there because his advice was useful and the
Emperor Alexander held him in high esteem personally. Armfeldt virulently
hated Napoleon and was a general full of self-confidence, a quality that always
influenced Alexander. Paulucci was there because he was bold and decided in
speech. The adjutants general were there because they always accompanied
the Emperor, and lastly and chiefly Pfuel was there because he had drawn up
the plan of campaign against Napoleon and, having induced Alexander to
believe in the efficacy of that plan, was directing the whole business of the
war. With Pfuel was Wolzogen, who expressed Pfuel's thoughts in a more
comprehensible way than Pfuel himself (who was a harsh, bookish theorist,
self-confident to the point of despising everyone else) was able to do.
Besides these Russians and foreigners who propounded new and unexpected
ideas every day—especially the foreigners, who did so with a boldness
characteristic of people employed in a country not their own—there were
many secondary personages accompanying the army because their principals
were there.
Among the opinions and voices in this immense, restless, brilliant, and proud
sphere, Prince Andrew noticed the following sharply defined subdivisions of
tendencies and parties:
The first party consisted of Pfuel and his adherents—military theorists who
believed in a science of war with immutable laws—laws of oblique
movements, outflankings, and so forth. Pfuel and his adherents demanded a
retirement into the depths of the country in accordance with precise laws
defined by a pseudo-theory of war, and they saw only barbarism, ignorance, or
evil intention in every deviation from that theory. To this party belonged the
foreign nobles, Wolzogen, Wintzingerode, and others, chiefly Germans.
The second party was directly opposed to the first; one extreme, as always
happens, was met by representatives of the other. The members of this party
were those who had demanded an advance from Vilna into Poland and
freedom from all prearranged plans. Besides being advocates of bold action,
this section also represented nationalism, which made them still more one-
sided in the dispute. They were Russians: Bagration, Ermolov (who was
beginning to come to the front), and others. At that time a famous joke of
Ermolov's was being circulated, that as a great favor he had petitioned the
Emperor to make him a German. The men of that party, remembering
Suvorov, said that what one had to do was not to reason, or stick pins into
maps, but to fight, beat the enemy, keep him out of Russia, and not let the
army get discouraged.
To the third party—in which the Emperor had most confidence—belonged the
courtiers who tried to arrange compromises between the other two. The
members of this party, chiefly civilians and to whom Arakcheev belonged,
thought and said what men who have no convictions but wish to seem to have
some generally say. They said that undoubtedly war, particularly against such
a genius as Bonaparte (they called him Bonaparte now), needs most deeply
devised plans and profound scientific knowledge and in that respect Pfuel was
a genius, but at the same time it had to be acknowledged that the theorists are
often one-sided, and therefore one should not trust them absolutely, but should
also listen to what Pfuel's opponents and practical men of experience in
warfare had to say, and then choose a middle course. They insisted on the
retention of the camp at Drissa, according to Pfuel's plan, but on changing the
movements of the other armies. Though, by this course, neither one aim nor
the other could be attained, yet it seemed best to the adherents of this third
party.
Of a fourth opinion the most conspicuous representative was the Tsarevich,
who could not forget his disillusionment at Austerlitz, where he had ridden out
at the head of the Guards, in his casque and cavalry uniform as to a review,
expecting to crush the French gallantly; but unexpectedly finding himself in
the front line had narrowly escaped amid the general confusion. The men of
this party had both the quality and the defect of frankness in their opinions.
They feared Napoleon, recognized his strength and their own weakness, and
frankly said so. They said: "Nothing but sorrow, shame, and ruin will come of
all this! We have abandoned Vilna and Vitebsk and shall abandon Drissa. The
only reasonable thing left to do is to conclude peace as soon as possible,
before we are turned out of Petersburg."
This view was very general in the upper army circles and found support also in
Petersburg and from the chancellor, Rumyantsev, who, for other reasons of
state, was in favor of peace.
The fifth party consisted of those who were adherents of Barclay de Tolly, not
so much as a man but as minister of war and commander-in-chief. "Be he what
he may" (they always began like that), "he is an honest, practical man and we
have nobody better. Give him real power, for war cannot be conducted
successfully without unity of command, and he will show what he can do, as
he did in Finland. If our army is well organized and strong and has withdrawn
to Drissa without suffering any defeats, we owe this entirely to Barclay. If
Barclay is now to be superseded by Bennigsen all will be lost, for Bennigsen
showed his incapacity already in 1807."
The sixth party, the Bennigsenites, said, on the contrary, that at any rate there
was no one more active and experienced than Bennigsen: "and twist about as
you may, you will have to come to Bennigsen eventually. Let the others make
mistakes now!" said they, arguing that our retirement to Drissa was a most
shameful reverse and an unbroken series of blunders. "The more mistakes that
are made the better. It will at any rate be understood all the sooner that things
cannot go on like this. What is wanted is not some Barclay or other, but a man
like Bennigsen, who made his mark in 1807, and to whom Napoleon himself
did justice—a man whose authority would be willingly recognized, and
Bennigsen is the only such man."
The seventh party consisted of the sort of people who are always to be found,
especially around young sovereigns, and of whom there were particularly
many round Alexander—generals and imperial aides-de-camp passionately
devoted to the Emperor, not merely as a monarch but as a man, adoring him
sincerely and disinterestedly, as Rostov had done in 1805, and who saw in him
not only all the virtues but all human capabilities as well. These men, though
enchanted with the sovereign for refusing the command of the army, yet
blamed him for such excessive modesty, and only desired and insisted that
their adored sovereign should abandon his diffidence and openly announce
that he would place himself at the head of the army, gather round him a
commander-in-chief's staff, and, consulting experienced theoreticians and
practical men where necessary, would himself lead the troops, whose spirits
would thereby be raised to the highest pitch.
The eighth and largest group, which in its enormous numbers was to the others
as ninety-nine to one, consisted of men who desired neither peace nor war,
neither an advance nor a defensive camp at the Drissa or anywhere else,
neither Barclay nor the Emperor, neither Pfuel nor Bennigsen, but only the one
most essential thing—as much advantage and pleasure for themselves as
possible. In the troubled waters of conflicting and intersecting intrigues that
eddied about the Emperor's headquarters, it was possible to succeed in many
ways unthinkable at other times. A man who simply wished to retain his
lucrative post would today agree with Pfuel, tomorrow with his opponent, and
the day after, merely to avoid responsibility or to please the Emperor, would
declare that he had no opinion at all on the matter. Another who wished to gain
some advantage would attract the Emperor's attention by loudly advocating
the very thing the Emperor had hinted at the day before, and would dispute
and shout at the council, beating his breast and challenging those who did not
agree with him to duels, thereby proving that he was prepared to sacrifice
himself for the common good. A third, in the absence of opponents, between
two councils would simply solicit a special gratuity for his faithful services,
well knowing that at that moment people would be too busy to refuse him. A
fourth while seemingly overwhelmed with work would often come
accidentally under the Emperor's eye. A fifth, to achieve his long-cherished
aim of dining with the Emperor, would stubbornly insist on the correctness or
falsity of some newly emerging opinion and for this object would produce
arguments more or less forcible and correct.
All the men of this party were fishing for rubles, decorations, and promotions,
and in this pursuit watched only the weathercock of imperial favor, and
directly they noticed it turning in any direction, this whole drone population of
the army began blowing hard that way, so that it was all the harder for the
Emperor to turn it elsewhere. Amid the uncertainties of the position, with the
menace of serious danger giving a peculiarly threatening character to
everything, amid this vortex of intrigue, egotism, conflict of views and
feelings, and the diversity of race among these people—this eighth and largest
party of those preoccupied with personal interests imparted great confusion
and obscurity to the common task. Whatever question arose, a swarm of these
drones, without having finished their buzzing on a previous theme, flew over
to the new one and by their hum drowned and obscured the voices of those
who were disputing honestly.
From among all these parties, just at the time Prince Andrew reached the
army, another, a ninth party, was being formed and was beginning to raise its
voice. This was the party of the elders, reasonable men experienced and
capable in state affairs, who, without sharing any of those conflicting opinions,
were able to take a detached view of what was going on at the staff at
headquarters and to consider means of escape from this muddle, indecision,
intricacy, and weakness.
The men of this party said and thought that what was wrong resulted chiefly
from the Emperor's presence in the army with his military court and from the
consequent presence there of an indefinite, conditional, and unsteady
fluctuation of relations, which is in place at court but harmful in an army; that
a sovereign should reign but not command the army, and that the only way out
of the position would be for the Emperor and his court to leave the army; that
the mere presence of the Emperor paralyzed the action of fifty thousand men
required to secure his personal safety, and that the worst commander-in-chief,
if independent, would be better than the very best one trammeled by the
presence and authority of the monarch.
Just at the time Prince Andrew was living unoccupied at Drissa, Shishkov, the
Secretary of State and one of the chief representatives of this party, wrote a
letter to the Emperor which Arakcheev and Balashev agreed to sign. In this
letter, availing himself of permission given him by the Emperor to discuss the
general course of affairs, he respectfully suggested—on the plea that it was
necessary for the sovereign to arouse a warlike spirit in the people of the
capital—that the Emperor should leave the army.
That arousing of the people by their sovereign and his call to them to defend
their country—the very incitement which was the chief cause of Russia's
triumph in so far as it was produced by the Tsar's personal presence in
Moscow—was suggested to the Emperor, and accepted by him, as a pretext
for quitting the army.
CHAPTER X
This letter had not yet been presented to the Emperor when Barclay, one day at
dinner, informed Bolkonski that the sovereign wished to see him personally, to
question him about Turkey, and that Prince Andrew was to present himself at
Bennigsen's quarters at six that evening.
News was received at the Emperor's quarters that very day of a fresh
movement by Napoleon which might endanger the army—news subsequently
found to be false. And that morning Colonel Michaud had ridden round the
Drissa fortifications with the Emperor and had pointed out to him that this
fortified camp constructed by Pfuel, and till then considered a chef-d'oeuvre of
tactical science which would ensure Napoleon's destruction, was an absurdity,
threatening the destruction of the Russian army.
Prince Andrew arrived at Bennigsen's quarters—a country gentleman's house
of moderate size, situated on the very banks of the river. Neither Bennigsen
nor the Emperor was there, but Chernyshev, the Emperor's aide-de-camp,
received Bolkonski and informed him that the Emperor, accompanied by
General Bennigsen and Marquis Paulucci, had gone a second time that day to
inspect the fortifications of the Drissa camp, of the suitability of which serious
doubts were beginning to be felt.
Chernyshev was sitting at a window in the first room with a French novel in
his hand. This room had probably been a music room; there was still an organ
in it on which some rugs were piled, and in one corner stood the folding
bedstead of Bennigsen's adjutant. This adjutant was also there and sat dozing
on the rolled-up bedding, evidently exhausted by work or by feasting. Two
doors led from the room, one straight on into what had been the drawing room,
and another, on the right, to the study. Through the first door came the sound
of voices conversing in German and occasionally in French. In that drawing
room were gathered, by the Emperor's wish, not a military council (the
Emperor preferred indefiniteness), but certain persons whose opinions he
wished to know in view of the impending difficulties. It was not a council of
war, but, as it were, a council to elucidate certain questions for the Emperor
personally. To this semicouncil had been invited the Swedish General
Armfeldt, Adjutant General Wolzogen, Wintzingerode (whom Napoleon had
referred to as a renegade French subject), Michaud, Toll, Count Stein who was
not a military man at all, and Pfuel himself, who, as Prince Andrew had heard,
was the mainspring of the whole affair. Prince Andrew had an opportunity of
getting a good look at him, for Pfuel arrived soon after himself and, in passing
through to the drawing room, stopped a minute to speak to Chernyshev.
At first sight, Pfuel, in his ill-made uniform of a Russian general, which fitted
him badly like a fancy costume, seemed familiar to Prince Andrew, though he
saw him now for the first time. There was about him something of Weyrother,
Mack, and Schmidt, and many other German theorist-generals whom Prince
Andrew had seen in 1805, but he was more typical than any of them. Prince
Andrew had never yet seen a German theorist in whom all the characteristics
of those others were united to such an extent.
Pfuel was short and very thin but broad-boned, of coarse, robust build, broad
in the hips, and with prominent shoulder blades. His face was much wrinkled
and his eyes deep set. His hair had evidently been hastily brushed smooth in
front of the temples, but stuck up behind in quaint little tufts. He entered the
room, looking restlessly and angrily around, as if afraid of everything in that
large apartment. Awkwardly holding up his sword, he addressed Chernyshev
and asked in German where the Emperor was. One could see that he wished to
pass through the rooms as quickly as possible, finish with the bows and
greetings, and sit down to business in front of a map, where he would feel at
home. He nodded hurriedly in reply to Chernyshev, and smiled ironically on
hearing that the sovereign was inspecting the fortifications that he, Pfuel, had
planned in accord with his theory. He muttered something to himself abruptly
and in a bass voice, as self-assured Germans do—it might have been "stupid
fellow"... or "the whole affair will be ruined," or "something absurd will come
of it."... Prince Andrew did not catch what he said and would have passed on,
but Chernyshev introduced him to Pfuel, remarking that Prince Andrew was
just back from Turkey where the war had terminated so fortunately. Pfuel
barely glanced—not so much at Prince Andrew as past him—and said, with a
laugh: "That must have been a fine tactical war"; and, laughing
contemptuously, went on into the room from which the sound of voices was
heard.
Pfuel, always inclined to be irritably sarcastic, was particularly disturbed that
day, evidently by the fact that they had dared to inspect and criticize his camp
in his absence. From this short interview with Pfuel, Prince Andrew, thanks to
his Austerlitz experiences, was able to form a clear conception of the man.
Pfuel was one of those hopelessly and immutably self-confident men, self-
confident to the point of martyrdom as only Germans are, because only
Germans are self-confident on the basis of an abstract notion—science, that is,
the supposed knowledge of absolute truth. A Frenchman is self-assured
because he regards himself personally, both in mind and body, as irresistibly
attractive to men and women. An Englishman is self-assured, as being a
citizen of the best-organized state in the world, and therefore as an Englishman
always knows what he should do and knows that all he does as an Englishman
is undoubtedly correct. An Italian is self-assured because he is excitable and
easily forgets himself and other people. A Russian is self-assured just because
he knows nothing and does not want to know anything, since he does not
believe that anything can be known. The German's self-assurance is worst of
all, stronger and more repulsive than any other, because he imagines that he
knows the truth—science—which he himself has invented but which is for
him the absolute truth.
Pfuel was evidently of that sort. He had a science—the theory of oblique
movements deduced by him from the history of Frederick the Great's wars,
and all he came across in the history of more recent warfare seemed to him
absurd and barbarous—monstrous collisions in which so many blunders were
committed by both sides that these wars could not be called wars, they did not
accord with the theory, and therefore could not serve as material for science.
In 1806 Pfuel had been one of those responsible, for the plan of campaign that
ended in Jena and Auerstadt, but he did not see the least proof of the fallibility
of his theory in the disasters of that war. On the contrary, the deviations made
from his theory were, in his opinion, the sole cause of the whole disaster, and
with characteristically gleeful sarcasm he would remark, "There, I said the
whole affair would go to the devil!" Pfuel was one of those theoreticians who
so love their theory that they lose sight of the theory's object—its practical
application. His love of theory made him hate everything practical, and he
would not listen to it. He was even pleased by failures, for failures resulting
from deviations in practice from the theory only proved to him the accuracy of
his theory.
He said a few words to Prince Andrew and Chernyshev about the present war,
with the air of a man who knows beforehand that all will go wrong, and who is
not displeased that it should be so. The unbrushed tufts of hair sticking up
behind and the hastily brushed hair on his temples expressed this most
eloquently.
He passed into the next room, and the deep, querulous sounds of his voice
were at once heard from there.
CHAPTER XI
Prince Andrew's eyes were still following Pfuel out of the room when Count
Bennigsen entered hurriedly, and nodding to Bolkonski, but not pausing, went
into the study, giving instructions to his adjutant as he went. The Emperor was
following him, and Bennigsen had hastened on to make some preparations and
to be ready to receive the sovereign. Chernyshev and Prince Andrew went out
into the porch, where the Emperor, who looked fatigued, was dismounting.
Marquis Paulucci was talking to him with particular warmth and the Emperor,
with his head bent to the left, was listening with a dissatisfied air. The
Emperor moved forward evidently wishing to end the conversation, but the
flushed and excited Italian, oblivious of decorum, followed him and continued
to speak.
"And as for the man who advised forming this camp—the Drissa camp," said
Paulucci, as the Emperor mounted the steps and noticing Prince Andrew
scanned his unfamiliar face, "as to that person, sire..." continued Paulucci,
desperately, apparently unable to restrain himself, "the man who advised the
Drissa camp—I see no alternative but the lunatic asylum or the gallows!"
Without heeding the end of the Italian's remarks, and as though not hearing
them, the Emperor, recognizing Bolkonski, addressed him graciously.
"I am very glad to see you! Go in there where they are meeting, and wait for
me."
The Emperor went into the study. He was followed by Prince Peter
Mikhaylovich Volkonski and Baron Stein, and the door closed behind them.
Prince Andrew, taking advantage of the Emperor's permission, accompanied
Paulucci, whom he had known in Turkey, into the drawing room where the
council was assembled.
Prince Peter Mikhaylovich Volkonski occupied the position, as it were, of
chief of the Emperor's staff. He came out of the study into the drawing room
with some maps which he spread on a table, and put questions on which he
wished to hear the opinion of the gentlemen present. What had happened was
that news (which afterwards proved to be false) had been received during the
night of a movement by the French to outflank the Drissa camp.
The first to speak was General Armfeldt who, to meet the difficulty that
presented itself, unexpectedly proposed a perfectly new position away from
the Petersburg and Moscow roads. The reason for this was inexplicable (unless
he wished to show that he, too, could have an opinion), but he urged that at
this point the army should unite and there await the enemy. It was plain that
Armfeldt had thought out that plan long ago and now expounded it not so
much to answer the questions put—which, in fact, his plan did not answer—as
to avail himself of the opportunity to air it. It was one of the millions of
proposals, one as good as another, that could be made as long as it was quite
unknown what character the war would take. Some disputed his arguments,
others defended them. Young Count Toll objected to the Swedish general's
views more warmly than anyone else, and in the course of the dispute drew
from his side pocket a well-filled notebook, which he asked permission to read
to them. In these voluminous notes Toll suggested another scheme, totally
different from Armfeldt's or Pfuel's plan of campaign. In answer to Toll,
Paulucci suggested an advance and an attack, which, he urged, could alone
extricate us from the present uncertainty and from the trap (as he called the
Drissa camp) in which we were situated.
During all these discussions Pfuel and his interpreter, Wolzogen (his "bridge"
in court relations), were silent. Pfuel only snorted contemptuously and turned
away, to show that he would never demean himself by replying to such
nonsense as he was now hearing. So when Prince Volkonski, who was in the
chair, called on him to give his opinion, he merely said:
"Why ask me? General Armfeldt has proposed a splendid position with an
exposed rear, or why not this Italian gentleman's attack—very fine, or a
retreat, also good! Why ask me?" said he. "Why, you yourselves know
everything better than I do."
But when Volkonski said, with a frown, that it was in the Emperor's name that
he asked his opinion, Pfuel rose and, suddenly growing animated, began to
speak:
"Everything has been spoiled, everything muddled, everybody thought they
knew better than I did, and now you come to me! How mend matters? There is
nothing to mend! The principles laid down by me must be strictly adhered to,"
said he, drumming on the table with his bony fingers. "What is the difficulty?
Nonsense, childishness!"
He went up to the map and speaking rapidly began proving that no eventuality
could alter the efficiency of the Drissa camp, that everything had been
foreseen, and that if the enemy were really going to outflank it, the enemy
would inevitably be destroyed.
Paulucci, who did not know German, began questioning him in French.
Wolzogen came to the assistance of his chief, who spoke French badly, and
began translating for him, hardly able to keep pace with Pfuel, who was
rapidly demonstrating that not only all that had happened, but all that could
happen, had been foreseen in his scheme, and that if there were now any
difficulties the whole fault lay in the fact that his plan had not been precisely
executed. He kept laughing sarcastically, he demonstrated, and at last
contemptuously ceased to demonstrate, like a mathematician who ceases to
prove in various ways the accuracy of a problem that has already been proved.
Wolzogen took his place and continued to explain his views in French, every
now and then turning to Pfuel and saying, "Is it not so, your excellency?" But
Pfuel, like a man heated in a fight who strikes those on his own side, shouted
angrily at his own supporter, Wolzogen:
"Well, of course, what more is there to explain?"
Paulucci and Michaud both attacked Wolzogen simultaneously in French.
Armfeldt addressed Pfuel in German. Toll explained to Volkonski in Russian.
Prince Andrew listened and observed in silence.
Of all these men Prince Andrew sympathized most with Pfuel, angry,
determined, and absurdly self-confident as he was. Of all those present,
evidently he alone was not seeking anything for himself, nursed no hatred
against anyone, and only desired that the plan, formed on a theory arrived at
by years of toil, should be carried out. He was ridiculous, and unpleasantly
sarcastic, but yet he inspired involuntary respect by his boundless devotion to
an idea. Besides this, the remarks of all except Pfuel had one common trait
that had not been noticeable at the council of war in 1805: there was now a
panic fear of Napoleon's genius, which, though concealed, was noticeable in
every rejoinder. Everything was assumed to be possible for Napoleon, they
expected him from every side, and invoked his terrible name to shatter each
other's proposals. Pfuel alone seemed to consider Napoleon a barbarian like
everyone else who opposed his theory. But besides this feeling of respect,
Pfuel evoked pity in Prince Andrew. From the tone in which the courtiers
addressed him and the way Paulucci had allowed himself to speak of him to
the Emperor, but above all from a certain desperation in Pfuel's own
expressions, it was clear that the others knew, and Pfuel himself felt, that his
fall was at hand. And despite his self-confidence and grumpy German sarcasm
he was pitiable, with his hair smoothly brushed on the temples and sticking up
in tufts behind. Though he concealed the fact under a show of irritation and
contempt, he was evidently in despair that the sole remaining chance of
verifying his theory by a huge experiment and proving its soundness to the
whole world was slipping away from him.
The discussions continued a long time, and the longer they lasted the more
heated became the disputes, culminating in shouts and personalities, and the
less was it possible to arrive at any general conclusion from all that had been
said. Prince Andrew, listening to this polyglot talk and to these surmises,
plans, refutations, and shouts, felt nothing but amazement at what they were
saying. A thought that had long since and often occurred to him during his
military activities—the idea that there is not and cannot be any science of war,
and that therefore there can be no such thing as a military genius—now
appeared to him an obvious truth. "What theory and science is possible about a
matter the conditions and circumstances of which are unknown and cannot be
defined, especially when the strength of the acting forces cannot be
ascertained? No one was or is able to foresee in what condition our or the
enemy's armies will be in a day's time, and no one can gauge the force of this
or that detachment. Sometimes—when there is not a coward at the front to
shout, 'We are cut off!' and start running, but a brave and jolly lad who shouts,
'Hurrah!'—a detachment of five thousand is worth thirty thousand, as at Schon
Grabern, while at times fifty thousand run from eight thousand, as at
Austerlitz. What science can there be in a matter in which, as in all practical
matters, nothing can be defined and everything depends on innumerable
conditions, the significance of which is determined at a particular moment
which arrives no one knows when? Armfeldt says our army is cut in half, and
Paulucci says we have got the French army between two fires; Michaud says
that the worthlessness of the Drissa camp lies in having the river behind it, and
Pfuel says that is what constitutes its strength; Toll proposes one plan,
Armfeldt another, and they are all good and all bad, and the advantages of any
suggestions can be seen only at the moment of trial. And why do they all
speak of a 'military genius'? Is a man a genius who can order bread to be
brought up at the right time and say who is to go to the right and who to the
left? It is only because military men are invested with pomp and power and
crowds of sychophants flatter power, attributing to it qualities of genius it does
not possess. The best generals I have known were, on the contrary, stupid or
absent-minded men. Bagration was the best, Napoleon himself admitted that.
And of Bonaparte himself! I remember his limited, self-satisfied face on the
field of Austerlitz. Not only does a good army commander not need any
special qualities, on the contrary he needs the absence of the highest and best
human attributes—love, poetry, tenderness, and philosophic inquiring doubt.
He should be limited, firmly convinced that what he is doing is very important
(otherwise he will not have sufficient patience), and only then will he be a
brave leader. God forbid that he should be humane, should love, or pity, or
think of what is just and unjust. It is understandable that a theory of their
'genius' was invented for them long ago because they have power! The success
of a military action depends not on them, but on the man in the ranks who
shouts, 'We are lost!' or who shouts, 'Hurrah!' And only in the ranks can one
serve with assurance of being useful."
So thought Prince Andrew as he listened to the talking, and he roused himself
only when Paulucci called him and everyone was leaving.
At the review next day the Emperor asked Prince Andrew where he would like
to serve, and Prince Andrew lost his standing in court circles forever by not
asking to remain attached to the sovereign's person, but for permission to serve
in the army.
CHAPTER XII
Before the beginning of the campaign, Rostov had received a letter from his
parents in which they told him briefly of Natasha's illness and the breaking off
of her engagement to Prince Andrew (which they explained by Natasha's
having rejected him) and again asked Nicholas to retire from the army and
return home. On receiving this letter, Nicholas did not even make any attempt
to get leave of absence or to retire from the army, but wrote to his parents that
he was sorry Natasha was ill and her engagement broken off, and that he
would do all he could to meet their wishes. To Sonya he wrote separately.
"Adored friend of my soul!" he wrote. "Nothing but honor could keep me from
returning to the country. But now, at the commencement of the campaign, I
should feel dishonored, not only in my comrades' eyes but in my own, if I
preferred my own happiness to my love and duty to the Fatherland. But this
shall be our last separation. Believe me, directly the war is over, if I am still
alive and still loved by you, I will throw up everything and fly to you, to press
you forever to my ardent breast."
It was, in fact, only the commencement of the campaign that prevented Rostov
from returning home as he had promised and marrying Sonya. The autumn in
Otradnoe with the hunting, and the winter with the Christmas holidays and
Sonya's love, had opened out to him a vista of tranquil rural joys and peace
such as he had never known before, and which now allured him. "A splendid
wife, children, a good pack of hounds, a dozen leashes of smart borzois,
agriculture, neighbors, service by election..." thought he. But now the
campaign was beginning, and he had to remain with his regiment. And since it
had to be so, Nicholas Rostov, as was natural to him, felt contented with the
life he led in the regiment and was able to find pleasure in that life.
On his return from his furlough Nicholas, having been joyfully welcomed by
his comrades, was sent to obtain remounts and brought back from the Ukraine
excellent horses which pleased him and earned him commendation from his
commanders. During his absence he had been promoted captain, and when the
regiment was put on war footing with an increase in numbers, he was again
allotted his old squadron.
The campaign began, the regiment was moved into Poland on double pay, new
officers arrived, new men and horses, and above all everybody was infected
with the merrily excited mood that goes with the commencement of a war, and
Rostov, conscious of his advantageous position in the regiment, devoted
himself entirely to the pleasures and interests of military service, though he
knew that sooner or later he would have to relinquish them.
The troops retired from Vilna for various complicated reasons of state,
political and strategic. Each step of the retreat was accompanied by a
complicated interplay of interests, arguments, and passions at headquarters.
For the Pavlograd hussars, however, the whole of this retreat during the finest
period of summer and with sufficient supplies was a very simple and agreeable
business.
It was only at headquarters that there was depression, uneasiness, and
intriguing; in the body of the army they did not ask themselves where they
were going or why. If they regretted having to retreat, it was only because they
had to leave billets they had grown accustomed to, or some pretty young
Polish lady. If the thought that things looked bad chanced to enter anyone's
head, he tried to be as cheerful as befits a good soldier and not to think of the
general trend of affairs, but only of the task nearest to hand. First they camped
gaily before Vilna, making acquaintance with the Polish landowners,
preparing for reviews and being reviewed by the Emperor and other high
commanders. Then came an order to retreat to Sventsyani and destroy any
provisions they could not carry away with them. Sventsyani was remembered
by the hussars only as the drunken camp, a name the whole army gave to their
encampment there, and because many complaints were made against the
troops, who, taking advantage of the order to collect provisions, took also
horses, carriages, and carpets from the Polish proprietors. Rostov remembered
Sventsyani, because on the first day of their arrival at that small town he
changed his sergeant major and was unable to manage all the drunken men of
his squadron who, unknown to him, had appropriated five barrels of old beer.
From Sventsyani they retired farther and farther to Drissa, and thence again
beyond Drissa, drawing near to the frontier of Russia proper.
On the thirteenth of July the Pavlograds took part in a serious action for the
first time.
On the twelfth of July, on the eve of that action, there was a heavy storm of
rain and hail. In general, the summer of 1812 was remarkable for its storms.
The two Pavlograd squadrons were bivouacking on a field of rye, which was
already in ear but had been completely trodden down by cattle and horses. The
rain was descending in torrents, and Rostov, with a young officer named Ilyin,
his protege, was sitting in a hastily constructed shelter. An officer of their
regiment, with long mustaches extending onto his cheeks, who after riding to
the staff had been overtaken by the rain, entered Rostov's shelter.
"I have come from the staff, Count. Have you heard of Raevski's exploit?"
And the officer gave them details of the Saltanov battle, which he had heard at
the staff.
Rostov, smoking his pipe and turning his head about as the water trickled
down his neck, listened inattentively, with an occasional glance at Ilyin, who
was pressing close to him. This officer, a lad of sixteen who had recently
joined the regiment, was now in the same relation to Nicholas that Nicholas
had been to Denisov seven years before. Ilyin tried to imitate Rostov in
everything and adored him as a girl might have done.
Zdrzhinski, the officer with the long mustache, spoke grandiloquently of the
Saltanov dam being "a Russian Thermopylae," and of how a deed worthy of
antiquity had been performed by General Raevski. He recounted how Raevski
had led his two sons onto the dam under terrific fire and had charged with
them beside him. Rostov heard the story and not only said nothing to
encourage Zdrzhinski's enthusiasm but, on the contrary, looked like a man
ashamed of what he was hearing, though with no intention of contradicting it.
Since the campaigns of Austerlitz and of 1807 Rostov knew by experience that
men always lie when describing military exploits, as he himself had done
when recounting them; besides that, he had experience enough to know that
nothing happens in war at all as we can imagine or relate it. And so he did not
like Zdrzhinski's tale, nor did he like Zdrzhinski himself who, with his
mustaches extending over his cheeks, bent low over the face of his hearer, as
was his habit, and crowded Rostov in the narrow shanty. Rostov looked at him
in silence. "In the first place, there must have been such a confusion and
crowding on the dam that was being attacked that if Raevski did lead his sons
there, it could have had no effect except perhaps on some dozen men nearest
to him," thought he, "the rest could not have seen how or with whom Raevski
came onto the dam. And even those who did see it would not have been much
stimulated by it, for what had they to do with Raevski's tender paternal
feelings when their own skins were in danger? And besides, the fate of the
Fatherland did not depend on whether they took the Saltanov dam or not, as
we are told was the case at Thermopylae. So why should he have made such a
sacrifice? And why expose his own children in the battle? I would not have
taken my brother Petya there, or even Ilyin, who's a stranger to me but a nice
lad, but would have tried to put them somewhere under cover," Nicholas
continued to think, as he listened to Zdrzhinski. But he did not express his
thoughts, for in such matters, too, he had gained experience. He knew that this
tale redounded to the glory of our arms and so one had to pretend not to doubt
it. And he acted accordingly.
"I can't stand this any more," said Ilyin, noticing that Rostov did not relish
Zdrzhinski's conversation. "My stockings and shirt... and the water is running
on my seat! I'll go and look for shelter. The rain seems less heavy."
Ilyin went out and Zdrzhinski rode away.
Five minutes later Ilyin, splashing through the mud, came running back to the
shanty.
"Hurrah! Rostov, come quick! I've found it! About two hundred yards away
there's a tavern where ours have already gathered. We can at least get dry
there, and Mary Hendrikhovna's there."
Mary Hendrikhovna was the wife of the regimental doctor, a pretty young
German woman he had married in Poland. The doctor, whether from lack of
means or because he did not like to part from his young wife in the early days
of their marriage, took her about with him wherever the hussar regiment went
and his jealousy had become a standing joke among the hussar officers.
Rostov threw his cloak over his shoulders, shouted to Lavrushka to follow
with the things, and—now slipping in the mud, now splashing right through it
—set off with Ilyin in the lessening rain and the darkness that was
occasionally rent by distant lightning.
"Rostov, where are you?"
"Here. What lightning!" they called to one another.
CHAPTER XIII
In the tavern, before which stood the doctor's covered cart, there were already
some five officers. Mary Hendrikhovna, a plump little blonde German, in a
dressing jacket and nightcap, was sitting on a broad bench in the front corner.
Her husband, the doctor, lay asleep behind her. Rostov and Ilyin, on entering
the room, were welcomed with merry shouts and laughter.
"Dear me, how jolly we are!" said Rostov laughing.
"And why do you stand there gaping?"
"What swells they are! Why, the water streams from them! Don't make our
drawing room so wet."
"Don't mess Mary Hendrikhovna's dress!" cried other voices.
Rostov and Ilyin hastened to find a corner where they could change into dry
clothes without offending Mary Hendrikhovna's modesty. They were going
into a tiny recess behind a partition to change, but found it completely filled
by three officers who sat playing cards by the light of a solitary candle on an
empty box, and these officers would on no account yield their position. Mary
Hendrikhovna obliged them with the loan of a petticoat to be used as a curtain,
and behind that screen Rostov and Ilyin, helped by Lavrushka who had
brought their kits, changed their wet things for dry ones.
A fire was made up in the dilapidated brick stove. A board was found, fixed on
two saddles and covered with a horsecloth, a small samovar was produced and
a cellaret and half a bottle of rum, and having asked Mary Hendrikhovna to
preside, they all crowded round her. One offered her a clean handkerchief to
wipe her charming hands, another spread a jacket under her little feet to keep
them from the damp, another hung his coat over the window to keep out the
draft, and yet another waved the flies off her husband's face, lest he should
wake up.
"Leave him alone," said Mary Hendrikhovna, smiling timidly and happily. "He
is sleeping well as it is, after a sleepless night."
"Oh, no, Mary Hendrikhovna," replied the officer, "one must look after the
doctor. Perhaps he'll take pity on me someday, when it comes to cutting off a
leg or an arm for me."
There were only three tumblers, the water was so muddy that one could not
make out whether the tea was strong or weak, and the samovar held only six
tumblers of water, but this made it all the pleasanter to take turns in order of
seniority to receive one's tumbler from Mary Hendrikhovna's plump little
hands with their short and not overclean nails. All the officers appeared to be,
and really were, in love with her that evening. Even those playing cards
behind the partition soon left their game and came over to the samovar,
yielding to the general mood of courting Mary Hendrikhovna. She, seeing
herself surrounded by such brilliant and polite young men, beamed with
satisfaction, try as she might to hide it, and perturbed as she evidently was
each time her husband moved in his sleep behind her.
There was only one spoon, sugar was more plentiful than anything else, but it
took too long to dissolve, so it was decided that Mary Hendrikhovna should
stir the sugar for everyone in turn. Rostov received his tumbler, and adding
some rum to it asked Mary Hendrikhovna to stir it.
"But you take it without sugar?" she said, smiling all the time, as if everything
she said and everything the others said was very amusing and had a double
meaning.
"It is not the sugar I want, but only that your little hand should stir my tea."
Mary Hendrikhovna assented and began looking for the spoon which someone
meanwhile had pounced on.
"Use your finger, Mary Hendrikhovna, it will be still nicer," said Rostov.
"Too hot!" she replied, blushing with pleasure.
Ilyin put a few drops of rum into the bucket of water and brought it to Mary
Hendrikhovna, asking her to stir it with her finger.
"This is my cup," said he. "Only dip your finger in it and I'll drink it all up."
When they had emptied the samovar, Rostov took a pack of cards and
proposed that they should play "Kings" with Mary Hendrikhovna. They drew
lots to settle who should make up her set. At Rostov's suggestion it was agreed
that whoever became "King" should have the right to kiss Mary
Hendrikhovna's hand, and that the "Booby" should go to refill and reheat the
samovar for the doctor when the latter awoke.
"Well, but supposing Mary Hendrikhovna is 'King'?" asked Ilyin.
"As it is, she is Queen, and her word is law!"
They had hardly begun to play before the doctor's disheveled head suddenly
appeared from behind Mary Hendrikhovna. He had been awake for some time,
listening to what was being said, and evidently found nothing entertaining or
amusing in what was going on. His face was sad and depressed. Without
greeting the officers, he scratched himself and asked to be allowed to pass as
they were blocking the way. As soon as he had left the room all the officers
burst into loud laughter and Mary Hendrikhovna blushed till her eyes filled
with tears and thereby became still more attractive to them. Returning from
the yard, the doctor told his wife (who had ceased to smile so happily, and
looked at him in alarm, awaiting her sentence) that the rain had ceased and
they must go to sleep in their covered cart, or everything in it would be stolen.
"But I'll send an orderly.... Two of them!" said Rostov. "What an idea, doctor!"
"I'll stand guard on it myself!" said Ilyin.
"No, gentlemen, you have had your sleep, but I have not slept for two nights,"
replied the doctor, and he sat down morosely beside his wife, waiting for the
game to end.
Seeing his gloomy face as he frowned at his wife, the officers grew still
merrier, and some of them could not refrain from laughter, for which they
hurriedly sought plausible pretexts. When he had gone, taking his wife with
him, and had settled down with her in their covered cart, the officers lay down
in the tavern, covering themselves with their wet cloaks, but they did not sleep
for a long time; now they exchanged remarks, recalling the doctor's uneasiness
and his wife's delight, now they ran out into the porch and reported what was
taking place in the covered trap. Several times Rostov, covering his head, tried
to go to sleep, but some remark would arouse him and conversation would be
resumed, to the accompaniment of unreasoning, merry, childlike laughter.
CHAPTER XIV
It was nearly three o'clock but no one was yet asleep, when the quartermaster
appeared with an order to move on to the little town of Ostrovna. Still
laughing and talking, the officers began hurriedly getting ready and again
boiled some muddy water in the samovar. But Rostov went off to his squadron
without waiting for tea. Day was breaking, the rain had ceased, and the clouds
were dispersing. It felt damp and cold, especially in clothes that were still
moist. As they left the tavern in the twilight of the dawn, Rostov and Ilyin
both glanced under the wet and glistening leather hood of the doctor's cart,
from under the apron of which his feet were sticking out, and in the middle of
which his wife's nightcap was visible and her sleepy breathing audible.
"She really is a dear little thing," said Rostov to Ilyin, who was following him.
"A charming woman!" said Ilyin, with all the gravity of a boy of sixteen.
Half an hour later the squadron was lined up on the road. The command was
heard to "mount" and the soldiers crossed themselves and mounted. Rostov
riding in front gave the order "Forward!" and the hussars, with clanking sabers
and subdued talk, their horses' hoofs splashing in the mud, defiled in fours and
moved along the broad road planted with birch trees on each side, following
the infantry and a battery that had gone on in front.
Tattered, blue-purple clouds, reddening in the east, were scudding before the
wind. It was growing lighter and lighter. That curly grass which always grows
by country roadsides became clearly visible, still wet with the night's rain; the
drooping branches of the birches, also wet, swayed in the wind and flung
down bright drops of water to one side. The soldiers' faces were more and
more clearly visible. Rostov, always closely followed by Ilyin, rode along the
side of the road between two rows of birch trees.
When campaigning, Rostov allowed himself the indulgence of riding not a
regimental but a Cossack horse. A judge of horses and a sportsman, he had
lately procured himself a large, fine, mettlesome, Donets horse, dun-colored,
with light mane and tail, and when he rode it no one could outgallop him. To
ride this horse was a pleasure to him, and he thought of the horse, of the
morning, of the doctor's wife, but not once of the impending danger.
Formerly, when going into action, Rostov had felt afraid; now he had not the
least feeling of fear. He was fearless, not because he had grown used to being
under fire (one cannot grow used to danger), but because he had learned how
to manage his thoughts when in danger. He had grown accustomed when
going into action to think about anything but what would seem most likely to
interest him—the impending danger. During the first period of his service,
hard as he tried and much as he reproached himself with cowardice, he had not
been able to do this, but with time it had come of itself. Now he rode beside
Ilyin under the birch trees, occasionally plucking leaves from a branch that
met his hand, sometimes touching his horse's side with his foot, or, without
turning round, handing a pipe he had finished to an hussar riding behind him,
with as calm and careless an air as though he were merely out for a ride. He
glanced with pity at the excited face of Ilyin, who talked much and in great
agitation. He knew from experience the tormenting expectation of terror and
death the cornet was suffering and knew that only time could help him.
As soon as the sun appeared in a clear strip of sky beneath the clouds, the
wind fell, as if it dared not spoil the beauty of the summer morning after the
storm; drops still continued to fall, but vertically now, and all was still. The
whole sun appeared on the horizon and disappeared behind a long narrow
cloud that hung above it. A few minutes later it reappeared brighter still from
behind the top of the cloud, tearing its edge. Everything grew bright and
glittered. And with that light, and as if in reply to it, came the sound of guns
ahead of them.
Before Rostov had had time to consider and determine the distance of that
firing, Count Ostermann-Tolstoy's adjutant came galloping from Vitebsk with
orders to advance at a trot along the road.
The squadron overtook and passed the infantry and the battery—which had
also quickened their pace—rode down a hill, and passing through an empty
and deserted village again ascended. The horses began to lather and the men to
flush.
"Halt! Dress your ranks!" the order of the regimental commander was heard
ahead. "Forward by the left. Walk, march!" came the order from in front.
And the hussars, passing along the line of troops on the left flank of our
position, halted behind our uhlans who were in the front line. To the right
stood our infantry in a dense column: they were the reserve. Higher up the hill,
on the very horizon, our guns were visible through the wonderfully clear air,
brightly illuminated by slanting morning sunbeams. In front, beyond a hollow
dale, could be seen the enemy's columns and guns. Our advanced line, already
in action, could be heard briskly exchanging shots with the enemy in the dale.
At these sounds, long unheard, Rostov's spirits rose, as at the strains of the
merriest music. Trap-ta-ta-tap! cracked the shots, now together, now several
quickly one after another. Again all was silent and then again it sounded as if
someone were walking on detonators and exploding them.
The hussars remained in the same place for about an hour. A cannonade began.
Count Ostermann with his suite rode up behind the squadron, halted, spoke to
the commander of the regiment, and rode up the hill to the guns.
After Ostermann had gone, a command rang out to the uhlans.
"Form column! Prepare to charge!"
The infantry in front of them parted into platoons to allow the cavalry to pass.
The uhlans started, the streamers on their spears fluttering, and trotted
downhill toward the French cavalry which was seen below to the left.
As soon as the uhlans descended the hill, the hussars were ordered up the hill
to support the battery. As they took the places vacated by the uhlans, bullets
came from the front, whining and whistling, but fell spent without taking
effect.
The sounds, which he had not heard for so long, had an even more pleasurable
and exhilarating effect on Rostov than the previous sounds of firing. Drawing
himself up, he viewed the field of battle opening out before him from the hill,
and with his whole soul followed the movement of the uhlans. They swooped
down close to the French dragoons, something confused happened there amid
the smoke, and five minutes later our uhlans were galloping back, not to the
place they had occupied but more to the left, and among the orange-colored
uhlans on chestnut horses and behind them, in a large group, blue French
dragoons on gray horses could be seen.
CHAPTER XV
Rostov, with his keen sportsman's eye, was one of the first to catch sight of
these blue French dragoons pursuing our uhlans. Nearer and nearer in
disorderly crowds came the uhlans and the French dragoons pursuing them.
He could already see how these men, who looked so small at the foot of the
hill, jostled and overtook one another, waving their arms and their sabers in
the air.
Rostov gazed at what was happening before him as at a hunt. He felt
instinctively that if the hussars struck at the French dragoons now, the latter
could not withstand them, but if a charge was to be made it must be done now,
at that very moment, or it would be too late. He looked around. A captain,
standing beside him, was gazing like himself with eyes fixed on the cavalry
below them.
"Andrew Sevastyanych!" said Rostov. "You know, we could crush them...."
"A fine thing too!" replied the captain, "and really..."
Rostov, without waiting to hear him out, touched his horse, galloped to the
front of his squadron, and before he had time to finish giving the word of
command, the whole squadron, sharing his feeling, was following him. Rostov
himself did not know how or why he did it. He acted as he did when hunting,
without reflecting or considering. He saw the dragoons near and that they were
galloping in disorder; he knew they could not withstand an attack—knew there
was only that moment and that if he let it slip it would not return. The bullets
were whining and whistling so stimulatingly around him and his horse was so
eager to go that he could not restrain himself. He touched his horse, gave the
word of command, and immediately, hearing behind him the tramp of the
horses of his deployed squadron, rode at full trot downhill toward the
dragoons. Hardly had they reached the bottom of the hill before their pace
instinctively changed to a gallop, which grew faster and faster as they drew
nearer to our uhlans and the French dragoons who galloped after them. The
dragoons were now close at hand. On seeing the hussars, the foremost began
to turn, while those behind began to halt. With the same feeling with which he
had galloped across the path of a wolf, Rostov gave rein to his Donets horse
and galloped to intersect the path of the dragoons' disordered lines. One Uhlan
stopped, another who was on foot flung himself to the ground to avoid being
knocked over, and a riderless horse fell in among the hussars. Nearly all the
French dragoons were galloping back. Rostov, picking out one on a gray
horse, dashed after him. On the way he came upon a bush, his gallant horse
cleared it, and almost before he had righted himself in his saddle he saw that
he would immediately overtake the enemy he had selected. That Frenchman,
by his uniform an officer, was going at a gallop, crouching on his gray horse
and urging it on with his saber. In another moment Rostov's horse dashed its
breast against the hindquarters of the officer's horse, almost knocking it over,
and at the same instant Rostov, without knowing why, raised his saber and
struck the Frenchman with it.
The instant he had done this, all Rostov's animation vanished. The officer fell,
not so much from the blow—which had but slightly cut his arm above the
elbow—as from the shock to his horse and from fright. Rostov reined in his
horse, and his eyes sought his foe to see whom he had vanquished. The French
dragoon officer was hopping with one foot on the ground, the other being
caught in the stirrup. His eyes, screwed up with fear as if he every moment
expected another blow, gazed up at Rostov with shrinking terror. His pale and
mud-stained face—fair and young, with a dimple in the chin and light-blue
eyes—was not an enemy's face at all suited to a battlefield, but a most
ordinary, homelike face. Before Rostov had decided what to do with him, the
officer cried, "I surrender!" He hurriedly but vainly tried to get his foot out of
the stirrup and did not remove his frightened blue eyes from Rostov's face.
Some hussars who galloped up disengaged his foot and helped him into the
saddle. On all sides, the hussars were busy with the dragoons; one was
wounded, but though his face was bleeding, he would not give up his horse;
another was perched up behind an hussar with his arms round him; a third was
being helped by an hussar to mount his horse. In front, the French infantry
were firing as they ran. The hussars galloped hastily back with their prisoners.
Rostov galloped back with the rest, aware of an unpleasant feeling of
depression in his heart. Something vague and confused, which he could not at
all account for, had come over him with the capture of that officer and the
blow he had dealt him.
Count Ostermann-Tolstoy met the returning hussars, sent for Rostov, thanked
him, and said he would report his gallant deed to the Emperor and would
recommend him for a St. George's Cross. When sent for by Count Ostermann,
Rostov, remembering that he had charged without orders, felt sure his
commander was sending for him to punish him for breach of discipline.
Ostermann's flattering words and promise of a reward should therefore have
struck him all the more pleasantly, but he still felt that same vaguely
disagreeable feeling of moral nausea. "But what on earth is worrying me?" he
asked himself as he rode back from the general. "Ilyin? No, he's safe. Have I
disgraced myself in any way? No, that's not it." Something else, resembling
remorse, tormented him. "Yes, oh yes, that French officer with the dimple.
And I remember how my arm paused when I raised it."
Rostov saw the prisoners being led away and galloped after them to have a
look at his Frenchman with the dimple on his chin. He was sitting in his
foreign uniform on an hussar packhorse and looked anxiously about him; The
sword cut on his arm could scarcely be called a wound. He glanced at Rostov
with a feigned smile and waved his hand in greeting. Rostov still had the same
indefinite feeling, as of shame.
All that day and the next his friends and comrades noticed that Rostov, without
being dull or angry, was silent, thoughtful, and preoccupied. He drank
reluctantly, tried to remain alone, and kept turning something over in his mind.
Rostov was always thinking about that brilliant exploit of his, which to his
amazement had gained him the St. George's Cross and even given him a
reputation for bravery, and there was something he could not at all understand.
"So others are even more afraid than I am!" he thought. "So that's all there is
in what is called heroism! And did I do it for my country's sake? And how was
he to blame, with his dimple and blue eyes? And how frightened he was! He
thought that I should kill him. Why should I kill him? My hand trembled. And
they have given me a St. George's Cross.... I can't make it out at all."
But while Nicholas was considering these questions and still could reach no
clear solution of what puzzled him so, the wheel of fortune in the service, as
often happens, turned in his favor. After the affair at Ostrovna he was brought
into notice, received command of an hussar battalion, and when a brave officer
was needed he was chosen.
CHAPTER XVI
On receiving news of Natasha's illness, the countess, though not quite well yet
and still weak, went to Moscow with Petya and the rest of the household, and
the whole family moved from Marya Dmitrievna's house to their own and
settled down in town.
Natasha's illness was so serious that, fortunately for her and for her parents,
the consideration of all that had caused the illness, her conduct and the
breaking off of her engagement, receded into the background. She was so ill
that it was impossible for them to consider in how far she was to blame for
what had happened. She could not eat or sleep, grew visibly thinner, coughed,
and, as the doctors made them feel, was in danger. They could not think of
anything but how to help her. Doctors came to see her singly and in
consultation, talked much in French, German, and Latin, blamed one another,
and prescribed a great variety of medicines for all the diseases known to them,
but the simple idea never occurred to any of them that they could not know the
disease Natasha was suffering from, as no disease suffered by a live man can
be known, for every living person has his own peculiarities and always has his
own peculiar, personal, novel, complicated disease, unknown to medicine—
not a disease of the lungs, liver, skin, heart, nerves, and so on mentioned in
medical books, but a disease consisting of one of the innumerable
combinations of the maladies of those organs. This simple thought could not
occur to the doctors (as it cannot occur to a wizard that he is unable to work
his charms) because the business of their lives was to cure, and they received
money for it and had spent the best years of their lives on that business. But,
above all, that thought was kept out of their minds by the fact that they saw
they were really useful, as in fact they were to the whole Rostov family. Their
usefulness did not depend on making the patient swallow substances for the
most part harmful (the harm was scarcely perceptible, as they were given in
small doses), but they were useful, necessary, and indispensable because they
satisfied a mental need of the invalid and of those who loved her—and that is
why there are, and always will be, pseudo-healers, wise women, homeopaths,
and allopaths. They satisfied that eternal human need for hope of relief, for
sympathy, and that something should be done, which is felt by those who are
suffering. They satisfied the need seen in its most elementary form in a child,
when it wants to have a place rubbed that has been hurt. A child knocks itself
and runs at once to the arms of its mother or nurse to have the aching spot
rubbed or kissed, and it feels better when this is done. The child cannot believe
that the strongest and wisest of its people have no remedy for its pain, and the
hope of relief and the expression of its mother's sympathy while she rubs the
bump comforts it. The doctors were of use to Natasha because they kissed and
rubbed her bump, assuring her that it would soon pass if only the coachman
went to the chemist's in the Arbat and got a powder and some pills in a pretty
box for a ruble and seventy kopeks, and if she took those powders in boiled
water at intervals of precisely two hours, neither more nor less.
What would Sonya and the count and countess have done, how would they
have looked, if nothing had been done, if there had not been those pills to give
by the clock, the warm drinks, the chicken cutlets, and all the other details of
life ordered by the doctors, the carrying out of which supplied an occupation
and consolation to the family circle? How would the count have borne his
dearly loved daughter's illness had he not known that it was costing him a
thousand rubles, and that he would not grudge thousands more to benefit her,
or had he not known that if her illness continued he would not grudge yet
other thousands and would take her abroad for consultations there, and had he
not been able to explain the details of how Metivier and Feller had not
understood the symptoms, but Frise had, and Mudrov had diagnosed them
even better? What would the countess have done had she not been able
sometimes to scold the invalid for not strictly obeying the doctor's orders?
"You'll never get well like that," she would say, forgetting her grief in her
vexation, "if you won't obey the doctor and take your medicine at the right
time! You mustn't trifle with it, you know, or it may turn to pneumonia," she
would go on, deriving much comfort from the utterance of that foreign word,
incomprehensible to others as well as to herself.
What would Sonya have done without the glad consciousness that she had not
undressed during the first three nights, in order to be ready to carry out all the
doctor's injunctions with precision, and that she still kept awake at night so as
not to miss the proper time when the slightly harmful pills in the little gilt box
had to be administered? Even to Natasha herself it was pleasant to see that so
many sacrifices were being made for her sake, and to know that she had to
take medicine at certain hours, though she declared that no medicine would
cure her and that it was all nonsense. And it was even pleasant to be able to
show, by disregarding the orders, that she did not believe in medical treatment
and did not value her life.
The doctor came every day, felt her pulse, looked at her tongue, and regardless
of her grief-stricken face joked with her. But when he had gone into another
room, to which the countess hurriedly followed him, he assumed a grave air
and thoughtfully shaking his head said that though there was danger, he had
hopes of the effect of this last medicine and one must wait and see, that the
malady was chiefly mental, but... And the countess, trying to conceal the
action from herself and from him, slipped a gold coin into his hand and always
returned to the patient with a more tranquil mind.
The symptoms of Natasha's illness were that she ate little, slept little, coughed,
and was always low-spirited. The doctors said that she could not get on
without medical treatment, so they kept her in the stifling atmosphere of the
town, and the Rostovs did not move to the country that summer of 1812.
In spite of the many pills she swallowed and the drops and powders out of the
little bottles and boxes of which Madame Schoss who was fond of such things
made a large collection, and in spite of being deprived of the country life to
which she was accustomed, youth prevailed. Natasha's grief began to be
overlaid by the impressions of daily life, it ceased to press so painfully on her
heart, it gradually faded into the past, and she began to recover physically.
CHAPTER XVII
Natasha was calmer but no happier. She not merely avoided all external forms
of pleasure—balls, promenades, concerts, and theaters—but she never laughed
without a sound of tears in her laughter. She could not sing. As soon as she
began to laugh, or tried to sing by herself, tears choked her: tears of remorse,
tears at the recollection of those pure times which could never return, tears of
vexation that she should so uselessly have ruined her young life which might
have been so happy. Laughter and singing in particular seemed to her like a
blasphemy, in face of her sorrow. Without any need of self-restraint, no wish
to coquet ever entered her head. She said and felt at that time that no man was
more to her than Nastasya Ivanovna, the buffoon. Something stood sentinel
within her and forbade her every joy. Besides, she had lost all the old interests
of her carefree girlish life that had been so full of hope. The previous autumn,
the hunting, "Uncle," and the Christmas holidays spent with Nicholas at
Otradnoe were what she recalled oftenest and most painfully. What would she
not have given to bring back even a single day of that time! But it was gone
forever. Her presentiment at the time had not deceived her—that that state of
freedom and readiness for any enjoyment would not return again. Yet it was
necessary to live on.
It comforted her to reflect that she was not better as she had formerly
imagined, but worse, much worse, than anybody else in the world. But this
was not enough. She knew that, and asked herself, "What next?" But there was
nothing to come. There was no joy in life, yet life was passing. Natasha
apparently tried not to be a burden or a hindrance to anyone, but wanted
nothing for herself. She kept away from everyone in the house and felt at ease
only with her brother Petya. She liked to be with him better than with the
others, and when alone with him she sometimes laughed. She hardly ever left
the house and of those who came to see them was glad to see only one person,
Pierre. It would have been impossible to treat her with more delicacy, greater
care, and at the same time more seriously than did Count Bezukhov. Natasha
unconsciously felt this delicacy and so found great pleasure in his society. But
she was not even grateful to him for it; nothing good on Pierre's part seemed to
her to be an effort, it seemed so natural for him to be kind to everyone that
there was no merit in his kindness. Sometimes Natasha noticed embarrassment
and awkwardness on his part in her presence, especially when he wanted to do
something to please her, or feared that something they spoke of would awaken
memories distressing to her. She noticed this and attributed it to his general
kindness and shyness, which she imagined must be the same toward everyone
as it was to her. After those involuntary words—that if he were free he would
have asked on his knees for her hand and her love—uttered at a moment when
she was so strongly agitated, Pierre never spoke to Natasha of his feelings; and
it seemed plain to her that those words, which had then so comforted her, were
spoken as all sorts of meaningless words are spoken to comfort a crying child.
It was not because Pierre was a married man, but because Natasha felt very
strongly with him that moral barrier the absence of which she had experienced
with Kuragin that it never entered her head that the relations between him and
herself could lead to love on her part, still less on his, or even to the kind of
tender, self-conscious, romantic friendship between a man and a woman of
which she had known several instances.
Before the end of the fast of St. Peter, Agrafena Ivanovna Belova, a country
neighbor of the Rostovs, came to Moscow to pay her devotions at the shrines
of the Moscow saints. She suggested that Natasha should fast and prepare for
Holy Communion, and Natasha gladly welcomed the idea. Despite the doctor's
orders that she should not go out early in the morning, Natasha insisted on
fasting and preparing for the sacrament, not as they generally prepared for it in
the Rostov family by attending three services in their own house, but as
Agrafena Ivanovna did, by going to church every day for a week and not once
missing Vespers, Matins, or Mass.
The countess was pleased with Natasha's zeal; after the poor results of the
medical treatment, in the depths of her heart she hoped that prayer might help
her daughter more than medicines and, though not without fear and concealing
it from the doctor, she agreed to Natasha's wish and entrusted her to Belova.
Agrafena Ivanovna used to come to wake Natasha at three in the morning, but
generally found her already awake. She was afraid of being late for Matins.
Hastily washing, and meekly putting on her shabbiest dress and an old
mantilla, Natasha, shivering in the fresh air, went out into the deserted streets
lit by the clear light of dawn. By Agrafena Ivanovna's advice Natasha prepared
herself not in their own parish, but at a church where, according to the devout
Agrafena Ivanovna, the priest was a man of very severe and lofty life. There
were never many people in the church; Natasha always stood beside Belova in
the customary place before an icon of the Blessed Virgin, let into the screen
before the choir on the left side, and a feeling, new to her, of humility before
something great and incomprehensible, seized her when at that unusual
morning hour, gazing at the dark face of the Virgin illuminated by the candles
burning before it and by the morning light falling from the window, she
listened to the words of the service which she tried to follow with
understanding. When she understood them her personal feeling became
interwoven in the prayers with shades of its own. When she did not
understand, it was sweeter still to think that the wish to understand everything
is pride, that it is impossible to understand all, that it is only necessary to
believe and to commit oneself to God, whom she felt guiding her soul at those
moments. She crossed herself, bowed low, and when she did not understand,
in horror at her own vileness, simply asked God to forgive her everything,
everything, to have mercy upon her. The prayers to which she surrendered
herself most of all were those of repentance. On her way home at an early hour
when she met no one but bricklayers going to work or men sweeping the
street, and everybody within the houses was still asleep, Natasha experienced
a feeling new to her, a sense of the possibility of correcting her faults, the
possibility of a new, clean life, and of happiness.
During the whole week she spent in this way, that feeling grew every day. And
the happiness of taking communion, or "communing" as Agrafena Ivanovna,
joyously playing with the word, called it, seemed to Natasha so great that she
felt she should never live till that blessed Sunday.
But the happy day came, and on that memorable Sunday, when, dressed in
white muslin, she returned home after communion, for the first time for many
months she felt calm and not oppressed by the thought of the life that lay
before her.
The doctor who came to see her that day ordered her to continue the powders
he had prescribed a fortnight previously.
"She must certainly go on taking them morning and evening," said he,
evidently sincerely satisfied with his success. "Only, please be particular about
it.
"Be quite easy," he continued playfully, as he adroitly took the gold coin in his
palm. "She will soon be singing and frolicking about. The last medicine has
done her a very great deal of good. She has freshened up very much."
The countess, with a cheerful expression on her face, looked down at her nails
and spat a little for luck as she returned to the drawing room.
CHAPTER XVIII
At the beginning of July more and more disquieting reports about the war
began to spread in Moscow; people spoke of an appeal by the Emperor to the
people, and of his coming himself from the army to Moscow. And as up to the
eleventh of July no manifesto or appeal had been received, exaggerated reports
became current about them and about the position of Russia. It was said that
the Emperor was leaving the army because it was in danger, it was said that
Smolensk had surrendered, that Napoleon had an army of a million and only a
miracle could save Russia.
On the eleventh of July, which was Saturday, the manifesto was received but
was not yet in print, and Pierre, who was at the Rostovs', promised to come to
dinner next day, Sunday, and bring a copy of the manifesto and appeal, which
he would obtain from Count Rostopchin.
That Sunday, the Rostovs went to Mass at the Razumovskis' private chapel as
usual. It was a hot July day. Even at ten o'clock, when the Rostovs got out of
their carriage at the chapel, the sultry air, the shouts of hawkers, the light and
gay summer clothes of the crowd, the dusty leaves of the trees on the
boulevard, the sounds of the band and the white trousers of a battalion
marching to parade, the rattling of wheels on the cobblestones, and the
brilliant, hot sunshine were all full of that summer languor, that content and
discontent with the present, which is most strongly felt on a bright, hot day in
town. All the Moscow notabilities, all the Rostovs' acquaintances, were at the
Razumovskis' chapel, for, as if expecting something to happen, many wealthy
families who usually left town for their country estates had not gone away that
summer. As Natasha, at her mother's side, passed through the crowd behind a
liveried footman who cleared the way for them, she heard a young man
speaking about her in too loud a whisper.
"That's Rostova, the one who..."
"She's much thinner, but all the same she's pretty!"
She heard, or thought she heard, the names of Kuragin and Bolkonski. But she
was always imagining that. It always seemed to her that everyone who looked
at her was thinking only of what had happened to her. With a sinking heart,
wretched as she always was now when she found herself in a crowd, Natasha
in her lilac silk dress trimmed with black lace walked—as women can walk—
with the more repose and stateliness the greater the pain and shame in her
soul. She knew for certain that she was pretty, but this no longer gave her
satisfaction as it used to. On the contrary it tormented her more than anything
else of late, and particularly so on this bright, hot summer day in town. "It's
Sunday again—another week past," she thought, recalling that she had been
here the Sunday before, "and always the same life that is no life, and the same
surroundings in which it used to be so easy to live. I'm pretty, I'm young, and I
know that now I am good. I used to be bad, but now I know I am good," she
thought, "but yet my best years are slipping by and are no good to anyone."
She stood by her mother's side and exchanged nods with acquaintances near
her. From habit she scrutinized the ladies' dresses, condemned the bearing of a
lady standing close by who was not crossing herself properly but in a cramped
manner, and again she thought with vexation that she was herself being judged
and was judging others, and suddenly, at the sound of the service, she felt
horrified at her own vileness, horrified that the former purity of her soul was
again lost to her.
A comely, fresh-looking old man was conducting the service with that mild
solemnity which has so elevating and soothing an effect on the souls of the
worshipers. The gates of the sanctuary screen were closed, the curtain was
slowly drawn, and from behind it a soft mysterious voice pronounced some
words. Tears, the cause of which she herself did not understand, made
Natasha's breast heave, and a joyous but oppressive feeling agitated her.
"Teach me what I should do, how to live my life, how I may grow good
forever, forever!" she pleaded.
The deacon came out onto the raised space before the altar screen and, holding
his thumb extended, drew his long hair from under his dalmatic and, making
the sign of the cross on his breast, began in a loud and solemn voice to recite
the words of the prayer...
"In peace let us pray unto the Lord."
"As one community, without distinction of class, without enmity, united by
brotherly love—let us pray!" thought Natasha.
"For the peace that is from above, and for the salvation of our souls."
"For the world of angels and all the spirits who dwell above us," prayed
Natasha.
When they prayed for the warriors, she thought of her brother and Denisov.
When they prayed for all traveling by land and sea, she remembered Prince
Andrew, prayed for him, and asked God to forgive her all the wrongs she had
done him. When they prayed for those who love us, she prayed for the
members of her own family, her father and mother and Sonya, realizing for the
first time how wrongly she had acted toward them, and feeling all the strength
of her love for them. When they prayed for those who hate us, she tried to
think of her enemies and people who hated her, in order to pray for them. She
included among her enemies the creditors and all who had business dealings
with her father, and always at the thought of enemies and those who hated her
she remembered Anatole who had done her so much harm—and though he did
not hate her she gladly prayed for him as for an enemy. Only at prayer did she
feel able to think clearly and calmly of Prince Andrew and Anatole, as men for
whom her feelings were as nothing compared with her awe and devotion to
God. When they prayed for the Imperial family and the Synod, she bowed
very low and made the sign of the cross, saying to herself that even if she did
not understand, still she could not doubt, and at any rate loved the governing
Synod and prayed for it.
When he had finished the Litany the deacon crossed the stole over his breast
and said, "Let us commit ourselves and our whole lives to Christ the Lord!"
"Commit ourselves to God," Natasha inwardly repeated. "Lord God, I submit
myself to Thy will!" she thought. "I want nothing, wish for nothing; teach me
what to do and how to use my will! Take me, take me!" prayed Natasha, with
impatient emotion in her heart, not crossing herself but letting her slender
arms hang down as if expecting some invisible power at any moment to take
her and deliver her from herself, from her regrets, desires, remorse, hopes, and
sins.
The countess looked round several times at her daughter's softened face and
shining eyes and prayed God to help her.
Unexpectedly, in the middle of the service, and not in the usual order Natasha
knew so well, the deacon brought out a small stool, the one he knelt on when
praying on Trinity Sunday, and placed it before the doors of the sanctuary
screen. The priest came out with his purple velvet biretta on his head, adjusted
his hair, and knelt down with an effort. Everybody followed his example and
they looked at one another in surprise. Then came the prayer just received
from the Synod—a prayer for the deliverance of Russia from hostile invasion.
"Lord God of might, God of our salvation!" began the priest in that voice,
clear, not grandiloquent but mild, in which only the Slav clergy read and
which acts so irresistibly on a Russian heart.
"Lord God of might, God of our salvation! Look this day in mercy and
blessing on Thy humble people, and graciously hear us, spare us, and have
mercy upon us! This foe confounding Thy land, desiring to lay waste the
whole world, rises against us; these lawless men are gathered together to
overthrow Thy kingdom, to destroy Thy dear Jerusalem, Thy beloved Russia;
to defile Thy temples, to overthrow Thine altars, and to desecrate our holy
shrines. How long, O Lord, how long shall the wicked triumph? How long
shall they wield unlawful power?
"Lord God! Hear us when we pray to Thee; strengthen with Thy might our
most gracious sovereign lord, the Emperor Alexander Pavlovich; be mindful
of his uprightness and meekness, reward him according to his righteousness,
and let it preserve us, Thy chosen Israel! Bless his counsels, his undertakings,
and his work; strengthen his kingdom by Thine almighty hand, and give him
victory over his enemy, even as Thou gavest Moses the victory over Amalek,
Gideon over Midian, and David over Goliath. Preserve his army, put a bow of
brass in the hands of those who have armed themselves in Thy Name, and gird
their loins with strength for the fight. Take up the spear and shield and arise to
help us; confound and put to shame those who have devised evil against us,
may they be before the faces of Thy faithful warriors as dust before the wind,
and may Thy mighty Angel confound them and put them to flight; may they
be ensnared when they know it not, and may the plots they have laid in secret
be turned against them; let them fall before Thy servants' feet and be laid low
by our hosts! Lord, Thou art able to save both great and small; Thou art God,
and man cannot prevail against Thee!
"God of our fathers! Remember Thy bounteous mercy and loving-kindness
which are from of old; turn not Thy face from us, but be gracious to our
unworthiness, and in Thy great goodness and Thy many mercies regard not
our transgressions and iniquities! Create in us a clean heart and renew a right
spirit within us, strengthen us all in Thy faith, fortify our hope, inspire us with
true love one for another, arm us with unity of spirit in the righteous defense
of the heritage Thou gavest to us and to our fathers, and let not the scepter of
the wicked be exalted against the destiny of those Thou hast sanctified.
"O Lord our God, in whom we believe and in whom we put our trust, let us
not be confounded in our hope of Thy mercy, and give us a token of Thy
blessing, that those who hate us and our Orthodox faith may see it and be put
to shame and perish, and may all the nations know that Thou art the Lord and
we are Thy people. Show Thy mercy upon us this day, O Lord, and grant us
Thy salvation; make the hearts of Thy servants to rejoice in Thy mercy; smite
down our enemies and destroy them swiftly beneath the feet of Thy faithful
servants! For Thou art the defense, the succor, and the victory of them that put
their trust in Thee, and to Thee be all glory, to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
now and forever, world without end. Amen."
In Natasha's receptive condition of soul this prayer affected her strongly. She
listened to every word about the victory of Moses over Amalek, of Gideon
over Midian, and of David over Goliath, and about the destruction of "Thy
Jerusalem," and she prayed to God with the tenderness and emotion with
which her heart was overflowing, but without fully understanding what she
was asking of God in that prayer. She shared with all her heart in the prayer
for the spirit of righteousness, for the strengthening of the heart by faith and
hope, and its animation by love. But she could not pray that her enemies might
be trampled under foot when but a few minutes before she had been wishing
she had more of them that she might pray for them. But neither could she
doubt the righteousness of the prayer that was being read on bended knees.
She felt in her heart a devout and tremulous awe at the thought of the
punishment that overtakes men for their sins, and especially of her own sins,
and she prayed to God to forgive them all, and her too, and to give them all,
and her too, peace and happiness. And it seemed to her that God heard her
prayer.
CHAPTER XIX
From the day when Pierre, after leaving the Rostovs' with Natasha's grateful
look fresh in his mind, had gazed at the comet that seemed to be fixed in the
sky and felt that something new was appearing on his own horizon—from that
day the problem of the vanity and uselessness of all earthly things, that had
incessantly tormented him, no longer presented itself. That terrible question
"Why?" "Wherefore?" which had come to him amid every occupation, was
now replaced, not by another question or by a reply to the former question, but
by her image. When he listened to, or himself took part in, trivial
conversations, when he read or heard of human baseness or folly, he was not
horrified as formerly, and did not ask himself why men struggled so about
these things when all is so transient and incomprehensible—but he
remembered her as he had last seen her, and all his doubts vanished—not
because she had answered the questions that had haunted him, but because his
conception of her transferred him instantly to another, a brighter, realm of
spiritual activity in which no one could be justified or guilty—a realm of
beauty and love which it was worth living for. Whatever worldly baseness
presented itself to him, he said to himself:
"Well, supposing N. N. swindled the country and the Tsar, and the country and
the Tsar confer honors upon him, what does that matter? She smiled at me
yesterday and asked me to come again, and I love her, and no one will ever
know it." And his soul felt calm and peaceful.
Pierre still went into society, drank as much and led the same idle and
dissipated life, because besides the hours he spent at the Rostovs' there were
other hours he had to spend somehow, and the habits and acquaintances he had
made in Moscow formed a current that bore him along irresistibly. But latterly,
when more and more disquieting reports came from the seat of war and
Natasha's health began to improve and she no longer aroused in him the
former feeling of careful pity, an ever-increasing restlessness, which he could
not explain, took possession of him. He felt that the condition he was in could
not continue long, that a catastrophe was coming which would change his
whole life, and he impatiently sought everywhere for signs of that approaching
catastrophe. One of his brother Masons had revealed to Pierre the following
prophecy concerning Napoleon, drawn from the Revelation of St. John.
In chapter 13, verse 18, of the Apocalypse, it is said:
Here is wisdom. Let him that hath understanding count the number of the
beast: for it is the number of a man; and his number is Six hundred threescore
and six.
And in the fifth verse of the same chapter:
And there was given unto him a mouth speaking great things and blasphemies;
and power was given unto him to continue forty and two months.
The French alphabet, written out with the same numerical values as the
Hebrew, in which the first nine letters denote units and the others tens, will
have the following significance:
Writing the words L'Empereur Napoleon in numbers, it appears that the sum
of them is 666, and that Napoleon was therefore the beast foretold in the
Apocalypse. Moreover, by applying the same system to the words quarantedeux,
which was the term allowed to the beast that "spoke great things and
blasphemies," the same number 666 was obtained; from which it followed that
the limit fixed for Napoleon's power had come in the year 1812 when the
French emperor was forty-two. This prophecy pleased Pierre very much and
he often asked himself what would put an end to the power of the beast, that
is, of Napoleon, and tried by the same system of using letters as numbers and
adding them up, to find an answer to the question that engrossed him. He
wrote the words L'Empereur Alexandre, La nation russe and added up their
numbers, but the sums were either more or less than 666. Once when making
such calculations he wrote down his own name in French, Comte Pierre
Besouhoff, but the sum of the numbers did not come right. Then he changed
the spelling, substituting a z for the s and adding de and the article le, still
without obtaining the desired result. Then it occurred to him: if the answer to
the question were contained in his name, his nationality would also be given in
the answer. So he wrote Le russe Besuhof and adding up the numbers got 671.
This was only five too much, and five was represented by e, the very letter
elided from the article le before the word Empereur. By omitting the e, though
incorrectly, Pierre got the answer he sought. L'russe Besuhof made 666. This
discovery excited him. How, or by what means, he was connected with the
great event foretold in the Apocalypse he did not know, but he did not doubt
that connection for a moment. His love for Natasha, Antichrist, Napoleon, the
invasion, the comet, 666, L'Empereur Napoleon, and L'russe Besuhof—all this
had to mature and culminate, to lift him out of that spellbound, petty sphere of
Moscow habits in which he felt himself held captive and lead him to a great
achievement and great happiness.
* Forty-two.
On the eve of the Sunday when the special prayer was read, Pierre had
promised the Rostovs to bring them, from Count Rostopchin whom he knew
well, both the appeal to the people and the news from the army. In the
morning, when he went to call at Rostopchin's he met there a courier fresh
from the army, an acquaintance of his own, who often danced at Moscow
balls.
"Do, please, for heaven's sake, relieve me of something!" said the courier. "I
have a sackful of letters to parents."
Among these letters was one from Nicholas Rostov to his father. Pierre took
that letter, and Rostopchin also gave him the Emperor's appeal to Moscow,
which had just been printed, the last army orders, and his own most recent
bulletin. Glancing through the army orders, Pierre found in one of them, in the
lists of killed, wounded, and rewarded, the name of Nicholas Rostov, awarded
a St. George's Cross of the Fourth Class for courage shown in the Ostrovna
affair, and in the same order the name of Prince Andrew Bolkonski, appointed
to the command of a regiment of Chasseurs. Though he did not want to remind
the Rostovs of Bolkonski, Pierre could not refrain from making them happy by
the news of their son's having received a decoration, so he sent that printed
army order and Nicholas' letter to the Rostovs, keeping the appeal, the
bulletin, and the other orders to take with him when he went to dinner.
His conversation with Count Rostopchin and the latter's tone of anxious hurry,
the meeting with the courier who talked casually of how badly things were
going in the army, the rumors of the discovery of spies in Moscow and of a
leaflet in circulation stating that Napoleon promised to be in both the Russian
capitals by the autumn, and the talk of the Emperor's being expected to arrive
next day—all aroused with fresh force that feeling of agitation and expectation
in Pierre which he had been conscious of ever since the appearance of the
comet, and especially since the beginning of the war.
He had long been thinking of entering the army and would have done so had
he not been hindered, first, by his membership of the Society of Freemasons to
which he was bound by oath and which preached perpetual peace and the
abolition of war, and secondly, by the fact that when he saw the great mass of
Muscovites who had donned uniform and were talking patriotism, he
somehow felt ashamed to take the step. But the chief reason for not carrying
out his intention to enter the army lay in the vague idea that he was L'russe
Besuhof who had the number of the beast, 666; that his part in the great affair
of setting a limit to the power of the beast that spoke great and blasphemous
things had been predestined from eternity, and that therefore he ought not to
undertake anything, but wait for what was bound to come to pass.
CHAPTER XX
A few intimate friends were dining with the Rostovs that day, as usual on
Sundays.
Pierre came early so as to find them alone.
He had grown so stout this year that he would have been abnormal had he not
been so tall, so broad of limb, and so strong that he carried his bulk with
evident ease.
He went up the stairs, puffing and muttering something. His coachman did not
even ask whether he was to wait. He knew that when his master was at the
Rostovs' he stayed till midnight. The Rostovs' footman rushed eagerly forward
to help him off with his cloak and take his hat and stick. Pierre, from club
habit, always left both hat and stick in the anteroom.
The first person he saw in the house was Natasha. Even before he saw her,
while taking off his cloak, he heard her. She was practicing solfa exercises in
the music room. He knew that she had not sung since her illness, and so the
sound of her voice surprised and delighted him. He opened the door softly and
saw her, in the lilac dress she had worn at church, walking about the room
singing. She had her back to him when he opened the door, but when, turning
quickly, she saw his broad, surprised face, she blushed and came rapidly up to
him.
"I want to try to sing again," she said, adding as if by way of excuse, "it is, at
least, something to do."
"That's capital!"
"How glad I am you've come! I am so happy today," she said, with the old
animation Pierre had not seen in her for a long time. "You know Nicholas has
received a St. George's Cross? I am so proud of him."
"Oh yes, I sent that announcement. But I don't want to interrupt you," he
added, and was about to go to the drawing room.
Natasha stopped him.
"Count, is it wrong of me to sing?" she said blushing, and fixing her eyes
inquiringly on him.
"No... Why should it be? On the contrary... But why do you ask me?"
"I don't know myself," Natasha answered quickly, "but I should not like to do
anything you disapproved of. I believe in you completely. You don't know
how important you are to me, how much you've done for me...." She spoke
rapidly and did not notice how Pierre flushed at her words. "I saw in that same
army order that he, Bolkonski" (she whispered the name hastily), "is in Russia,
and in the army again. What do you think?"—she was speaking hurriedly,
evidently afraid her strength might fail her—"Will he ever forgive me? Will he
not always have a bitter feeling toward me? What do you think? What do you
think?"
"I think..." Pierre replied, "that he has nothing to forgive.... If I were in his
place..."
By association of ideas, Pierre was at once carried back to the day when,
trying to comfort her, he had said that if he were not himself but the best man
in the world and free, he would ask on his knees for her hand; and the same
feeling of pity, tenderness, and love took possession of him and the same
words rose to his lips. But she did not give him time to say them.
"Yes, you... you..." she said, uttering the word you rapturously—"that's a
different thing. I know no one kinder, more generous, or better than you;
nobody could be! Had you not been there then, and now too, I don't know
what would have become of me, because..."
Tears suddenly rose in her eyes, she turned away, lifted her music before her
eyes, began singing again, and again began walking up and down the room.
Just then Petya came running in from the drawing room.
Petya was now a handsome rosy lad of fifteen with full red lips and resembled
Natasha. He was preparing to enter the university, but he and his friend
Obolenski had lately, in secret, agreed to join the hussars.
Petya had come rushing out to talk to his namesake about this affair. He had
asked Pierre to find out whether he would be accepted in the hussars.
Pierre walked up and down the drawing room, not listening to what Petya was
saying.
Petya pulled him by the arm to attract his attention.
"Well, what about my plan? Peter Kirilych, for heaven's sake! You are my only
hope," said Petya.
"Oh yes, your plan. To join the hussars? I'll mention it, I'll bring it all up
today."
"Well, mon cher, have you got the manifesto?" asked the old count. "The
countess has been to Mass at the Razumovskis' and heard the new prayer. She
says it's very fine."
"Yes, I've got it," said Pierre. "The Emperor is to be here tomorrow... there's to
be an Extraordinary Meeting of the nobility, and they are talking of a levy of
ten men per thousand. Oh yes, let me congratulate you!"
"Yes, yes, thank God! Well, and what news from the army?"
"We are again retreating. They say we're already near Smolensk," replied
Pierre.
"O Lord, O Lord!" exclaimed the count. "Where is the manifesto?"
"The Emperor's appeal? Oh yes!"
Pierre began feeling in his pockets for the papers, but could not find them. Still
slapping his pockets, he kissed the hand of the countess who entered the room
and glanced uneasily around, evidently expecting Natasha, who had left off
singing but had not yet come into the drawing room.
"On my word, I don't know what I've done with it," he said.
"There he is, always losing everything!" remarked the countess.
Natasha entered with a softened and agitated expression of face and sat down
looking silently at Pierre. As soon as she entered, Pierre's features, which had
been gloomy, suddenly lighted up, and while still searching for the papers he
glanced at her several times.
"No, really! I'll drive home, I must have left them there. I'll certainly..."
"But you'll be late for dinner."
"Oh! And my coachman has gone."
But Sonya, who had gone to look for the papers in the anteroom, had found
them in Pierre's hat, where he had carefully tucked them under the lining.
Pierre was about to begin reading.
"No, after dinner," said the old count, evidently expecting much enjoyment
from that reading.
At dinner, at which champagne was drunk to the health of the new chevalier of
St. George, Shinshin told them the town news, of the illness of the old
Georgian princess, of Metivier's disappearance from Moscow, and of how
some German fellow had been brought to Rostopchin and accused of being a
French "spyer" (so Count Rostopchin had told the story), and how Rostopchin
let him go and assured the people that he was "not a spire at all, but only an
old German ruin."
"People are being arrested..." said the count. "I've told the countess she should
not speak French so much. It's not the time for it now."
"And have you heard?" Shinshin asked. "Prince Golitsyn has engaged a master
to teach him Russian. It is becoming dangerous to speak French in the streets."
"And how about you, Count Peter Kirilych? If they call up the militia, you too
will have to mount a horse," remarked the old count, addressing Pierre.
Pierre had been silent and preoccupied all through dinner, seeming not to
grasp what was said. He looked at the count.
"Oh yes, the war," he said. "No! What sort of warrior should I make? And yet
everything is so strange, so strange! I can't make it out. I don't know, I am very
far from having military tastes, but in these times no one can answer for
himself."
After dinner the count settled himself comfortably in an easy chair and with a
serious face asked Sonya, who was considered an excellent reader, to read the
appeal.
"To Moscow, our ancient Capital!
"The enemy has entered the borders of Russia with immense forces. He comes
to despoil our beloved country."
Sonya read painstakingly in her high-pitched voice. The count listened with
closed eyes, heaving abrupt sighs at certain passages.
Natasha sat erect, gazing with a searching look now at her father and now at
Pierre.
Pierre felt her eyes on him and tried not to look round. The countess shook her
head disapprovingly and angrily at every solemn expression in the manifesto.
In all these words she saw only that the danger threatening her son would not
soon be over. Shinshin, with a sarcastic smile on his lips, was evidently
preparing to make fun of anything that gave him the opportunity: Sonya's
reading, any remark of the count's, or even the manifesto itself should no
better pretext present itself.
After reading about the dangers that threatened Russia, the hopes the Emperor
placed on Moscow and especially on its illustrious nobility, Sonya, with a
quiver in her voice due chiefly to the attention that was being paid to her, read
the last words:
"We ourselves will not delay to appear among our people in that Capital and in
other parts of our realm for consultation, and for the direction of all our levies,
both those now barring the enemy's path and those freshly formed to defeat
him wherever he may appear. May the ruin he hopes to bring upon us recoil on
his own head, and may Europe delivered from bondage glorify the name of
Russia!"
"Yes, that's it!" cried the count, opening his moist eyes and sniffing repeatedly,
as if a strong vinaigrette had been held to his nose; and he added, "Let the
Emperor but say the word and we'll sacrifice everything and begrudge
nothing."
Before Shinshin had time to utter the joke he was ready to make on the count's
patriotism, Natasha jumped up from her place and ran to her father.
"What a darling our Papa is!" she cried, kissing him, and she again looked at
Pierre with the unconscious coquetry that had returned to her with her better
spirits.
"There! Here's a patriot for you!" said Shinshin.
"Not a patriot at all, but simply..." Natasha replied in an injured tone.
"Everything seems funny to you, but this isn't at all a joke...."
"A joke indeed!" put in the count. "Let him but say the word and we'll all go....
We're not Germans!"
"But did you notice, it says, 'for consultation'?" said Pierre.
"Never mind what it's for...."
At this moment, Petya, to whom nobody was paying any attention, came up to
his father with a very flushed face and said in his breaking voice that was now
deep and now shrill:
"Well, Papa, I tell you definitely, and Mamma too, it's as you please, but I say
definitely that you must let me enter the army, because I can't... that's all...."
The countess, in dismay, looked up to heaven, clasped her hands, and turned
angrily to her husband.
"That comes of your talking!" said she.
But the count had already recovered from his excitement.
"Come, come!" said he. "Here's a fine warrior! No! Nonsense! You must
study."
"It's not nonsense, Papa. Fedya Obolenski is younger than I, and he's going
too. Besides, all the same I can't study now when..." Petya stopped short,
flushed till he perspired, but still got out the words, "when our Fatherland is in
danger."
"That'll do, that'll do—nonsense...."
"But you said yourself that we would sacrifice everything."
"Petya! Be quiet, I tell you!" cried the count, with a glance at his wife, who
had turned pale and was staring fixedly at her son.
"And I tell you—Peter Kirilych here will also tell you..."
"Nonsense, I tell you. Your mother's milk has hardly dried on your lips and
you want to go into the army! There, there, I tell you," and the count moved to
go out of the room, taking the papers, probably to reread them in his study
before having a nap.
"Well, Peter Kirilych, let's go and have a smoke," he said.
Pierre was agitated and undecided. Natasha's unwontedly brilliant eyes,
continually glancing at him with a more than cordial look, had reduced him to
this condition.
"No, I think I'll go home."
"Home? Why, you meant to spend the evening with us.... You don't often come
nowadays as it is, and this girl of mine," said the count good-naturedly,
pointing to Natasha, "only brightens up when you're here."
"Yes, I had forgotten... I really must go home... business..." said Pierre
hurriedly.
"Well, then, au revoir!" said the count, and went out of the room.
"Why are you going? Why are you upset?" asked Natasha, and she looked
challengingly into Pierre's eyes.
"Because I love you!" was what he wanted to say, but he did not say it, and
only blushed till the tears came, and lowered his eyes.
"Because it is better for me to come less often... because... No, simply I have
business...."
"Why? No, tell me!" Natasha began resolutely and suddenly stopped.
They looked at each other with dismayed and embarrassed faces. He tried to
smile but could not: his smile expressed suffering, and he silently kissed her
hand and went out.
Pierre made up his mind not to go to the Rostovs' any more.
CHAPTER XXI
After the definite refusal he had received, Petya went to his room and there
locked himself in and wept bitterly. When he came in to tea, silent, morose,
and with tear-stained face, everybody pretended not to notice anything.
Next day the Emperor arrived in Moscow, and several of the Rostovs'
domestic serfs begged permission to go to have a look at him. That morning
Petya was a long time dressing and arranging his hair and collar to look like a
grown-up man. He frowned before his looking glass, gesticulated, shrugged
his shoulders, and finally, without saying a word to anyone, took his cap and
left the house by the back door, trying to avoid notice. Petya decided to go
straight to where the Emperor was and to explain frankly to some gentleman-
in-waiting (he imagined the Emperor to be always surrounded by gentlemenin-waiting) that he, Count Rostov, in spite of his youth wished to serve his
country; that youth could be no hindrance to loyalty, and that he was ready
to... While dressing, Petya had prepared many fine things he meant to say to
the gentleman-in-waiting.
It was on the very fact of being so young that Petya counted for success in
reaching the Emperor—he even thought how surprised everyone would be at
his youthfulness—and yet in the arrangement of his collar and hair and by his
sedate deliberate walk he wished to appear a grown-up man. But the farther he
went and the more his attention was diverted by the ever-increasing crowds
moving toward the Kremlin, the less he remembered to walk with the
sedateness and deliberation of a man. As he approached the Kremlin he even
began to avoid being crushed and resolutely stuck out his elbows in a
menacing way. But within the Trinity Gateway he was so pressed to the wall
by people who probably were unaware of the patriotic intentions with which
he had come that in spite of all his determination he had to give in, and stop
while carriages passed in, rumbling beneath the archway. Beside Petya stood a
peasant woman, a footman, two tradesmen, and a discharged soldier. After
standing some time in the gateway, Petya tried to move forward in front of the
others without waiting for all the carriages to pass, and he began resolutely
working his way with his elbows, but the woman just in front of him, who was
the first against whom he directed his efforts, angrily shouted at him:
"What are you shoving for, young lordling? Don't you see we're all standing
still? Then why push?"
"Anybody can shove," said the footman, and also began working his elbows to
such effect that he pushed Petya into a very filthy corner of the gateway.
Petya wiped his perspiring face with his hands and pulled up the damp collar
which he had arranged so well at home to seem like a man's.
He felt that he no longer looked presentable, and feared that if he were now to
approach the gentlemen-in-waiting in that plight he would not be admitted to
the Emperor. But it was impossible to smarten oneself up or move to another
place, because of the crowd. One of the generals who drove past was an
acquaintance of the Rostovs', and Petya thought of asking his help, but came
to the conclusion that that would not be a manly thing to do. When the
carriages had all passed in, the crowd, carrying Petya with it, streamed
forward into the Kremlin Square which was already full of people. There were
people not only in the square, but everywhere—on the slopes and on the roofs.
As soon as Petya found himself in the square he clearly heard the sound of
bells and the joyous voices of the crowd that filled the whole Kremlin.
For a while the crowd was less dense, but suddenly all heads were bared, and
everyone rushed forward in one direction. Petya was being pressed so that he
could scarcely breathe, and everybody shouted, "Hurrah! hurrah! hurrah!"
Petya stood on tiptoe and pushed and pinched, but could see nothing except
the people about him.
All the faces bore the same expression of excitement and enthusiasm. A
tradesman's wife standing beside Petya sobbed, and the tears ran down her
cheeks.
"Father! Angel! Dear one!" she kept repeating, wiping away her tears with her
fingers.
"Hurrah!" was heard on all sides.
For a moment the crowd stood still, but then it made another rush forward.
Quite beside himself, Petya, clinching his teeth and rolling his eyes
ferociously, pushed forward, elbowing his way and shouting "hurrah!" as if he
were prepared that instant to kill himself and everyone else, but on both sides
of him other people with similarly ferocious faces pushed forward and
everybody shouted "hurrah!"
"So this is what the Emperor is!" thought Petya. "No, I can't petition him
myself—that would be too bold." But in spite of this he continued to struggle
desperately forward, and from between the backs of those in front he caught
glimpses of an open space with a strip of red cloth spread out on it; but just
then the crowd swayed back—the police in front were pushing back those who
had pressed too close to the procession: the Emperor was passing from the
palace to the Cathedral of the Assumption—and Petya unexpectedly received
such a blow on his side and ribs and was squeezed so hard that suddenly
everything grew dim before his eyes and he lost consciousness. When he came
to himself, a man of clerical appearance with a tuft of gray hair at the back of
his head and wearing a shabby blue cassock—probably a church clerk and
chanter—was holding him under the arm with one hand while warding off the
pressure of the crowd with the other.
"You've crushed the young gentleman!" said the clerk. "What are you up to?
Gently!... They've crushed him, crushed him!"
The Emperor entered the Cathedral of the Assumption. The crowd spread out
again more evenly, and the clerk led Petya—pale and breathless—to the Tsarcannon.
Several people were sorry for Petya, and suddenly a crowd turned
toward him and pressed round him. Those who stood nearest him attended to
him, unbuttoned his coat, seated him on the raised platform of the cannon, and
reproached those others (whoever they might be) who had crushed him.
"One might easily get killed that way! What do they mean by it? Killing
people! Poor dear, he's as white as a sheet!"—various voices were heard
saying.
Petya soon came to himself, the color returned to his face, the pain had passed,
and at the cost of that temporary unpleasantness he had obtained a place by the
cannon from where he hoped to see the Emperor who would be returning that
way. Petya no longer thought of presenting his petition. If he could only see
the Emperor he would be happy!
While the service was proceeding in the Cathedral of the Assumption—it was
a combined service of prayer on the occasion of the Emperor's arrival and of
thanksgiving for the conclusion of peace with the Turks—the crowd outside
spread out and hawkers appeared, selling kvas, gingerbread, and poppyseed
sweets (of which Petya was particularly fond), and ordinary conversation
could again be heard. A tradesman's wife was showing a rent in her shawl and
telling how much the shawl had cost; another was saying that all silk goods
had now got dear. The clerk who had rescued Petya was talking to a
functionary about the priests who were officiating that day with the bishop.
The clerk several times used the word "plenary" (of the service), a word Petya
did not understand. Two young citizens were joking with some serf girls who
were cracking nuts. All these conversations, especially the joking with the
girls, were such as might have had a particular charm for Petya at his age, but
they did not interest him now. He sat on his elevation—the pedestal of the
cannon—still agitated as before by the thought of the Emperor and by his love
for him. The feeling of pain and fear he had experienced when he was being
crushed, together with that of rapture, still further intensified his sense of the
importance of the occasion.
Suddenly the sound of a firing of cannon was heard from the embankment, to
celebrate the signing of peace with the Turks, and the crowd rushed
impetuously toward the embankment to watch the firing. Petya too would have
run there, but the clerk who had taken the young gentleman under his
protection stopped him. The firing was still proceeding when officers,
generals, and gentlemen-in-waiting came running out of the cathedral, and
after them others in a more leisurely manner: caps were again raised, and those
who had run to look at the cannon ran back again. At last four men in
uniforms and sashes emerged from the cathedral doors. "Hurrah! hurrah!"
shouted the crowd again.
"Which is he? Which?" asked Petya in a tearful voice, of those around him,
but no one answered him, everybody was too excited; and Petya, fixing on one
of those four men, whom he could not clearly see for the tears of joy that filled
his eyes, concentrated all his enthusiasm on him—though it happened not to
be the Emperor—frantically shouted "Hurrah!" and resolved that tomorrow,
come what might, he would join the army.
The crowd ran after the Emperor, followed him to the palace, and began to
disperse. It was already late, and Petya had not eaten anything and was
drenched with perspiration, yet he did not go home but stood with that
diminishing, but still considerable, crowd before the palace while the Emperor
dined—looking in at the palace windows, expecting he knew not what, and
envying alike the notables he saw arriving at the entrance to dine with the
Emperor and the court footmen who served at table, glimpses of whom could
be seen through the windows.
While the Emperor was dining, Valuev, looking out of the window, said:
"The people are still hoping to see Your Majesty again."
The dinner was nearly over, and the Emperor, munching a biscuit, rose and
went out onto the balcony. The people, with Petya among them, rushed toward
the balcony.
"Angel! Dear one! Hurrah! Father!..." cried the crowd, and Petya with it, and
again the women and men of weaker mold, Petya among them, wept with joy.
A largish piece of the biscuit the Emperor was holding in his hand broke off,
fell on the balcony parapet, and then to the ground. A coachman in a jerkin,
who stood nearest, sprang forward and snatched it up. Several people in the
crowd rushed at the coachman. Seeing this the Emperor had a plateful of
biscuits brought him and began throwing them down from the balcony. Petya's
eyes grew bloodshot, and still more excited by the danger of being crushed, he
rushed at the biscuits. He did not know why, but he had to have a biscuit from
the Tsar's hand and he felt that he must not give way. He sprang forward and
upset an old woman who was catching at a biscuit; the old woman did not
consider herself defeated though she was lying on the ground—she grabbed at
some biscuits but her hand did not reach them. Petya pushed her hand away
with his knee, seized a biscuit, and as if fearing to be too late, again shouted
"Hurrah!" with a voice already hoarse.
The Emperor went in, and after that the greater part of the crowd began to
disperse.
"There! I said if only we waited—and so it was!" was being joyfully said by
various people.
Happy as Petya was, he felt sad at having to go home knowing that all the
enjoyment of that day was over. He did not go straight home from the
Kremlin, but called on his friend Obolenski, who was fifteen and was also
entering the regiment. On returning home Petya announced resolutely and
firmly that if he was not allowed to enter the service he would run away. And
next day, Count Ilya Rostov—though he had not yet quite yielded—went to
inquire how he could arrange for Petya to serve where there would be least
danger.
CHAPTER XXII
Two days later, on the fifteenth of July, an immense number of carriages were
standing outside the Sloboda Palace.
The great halls were full. In the first were the nobility and gentry in their
uniforms, in the second bearded merchants in full-skirted coats of blue cloth
and wearing medals. In the noblemen's hall there was an incessant movement
and buzz of voices. The chief magnates sat on high-backed chairs at a large
table under the portrait of the Emperor, but most of the gentry were strolling
about the room.
All these nobles, whom Pierre met every day at the club or in their own
houses, were in uniform—some in that of Catherine's day, others in that of
Emperor Paul, others again in the new uniforms of Alexander's time or the
ordinary uniform of the nobility, and the general characteristic of being in
uniform imparted something strange and fantastic to these diverse and familiar
personalities, both old and young. The old men, dim-eyed, toothless, bald,
sallow, and bloated, or gaunt and wrinkled, were especially striking. For the
most part they sat quietly in their places and were silent, or, if they walked
about and talked, attached themselves to someone younger. On all these faces,
as on the faces of the crowd Petya had seen in the Square, there was a striking
contradiction: the general expectation of a solemn event, and at the same time
the everyday interests in a boston card party, Peter the cook, Zinaida
Dmitrievna's health, and so on.
Pierre was there too, buttoned up since early morning in a nobleman's uniform
that had become too tight for him. He was agitated; this extraordinary
gathering not only of nobles but also of the merchant-class—les etats generaux
(States-General)—evoked in him a whole series of ideas he had long laid aside
but which were deeply graven in his soul: thoughts of the Contrat Social and
the French Revolution. The words that had struck him in the Emperor's appeal
—that the sovereign was coming to the capital for consultation with his people
—strengthened this idea. And imagining that in this direction something
important which he had long awaited was drawing near, he strolled about
watching and listening to conversations, but nowhere finding any confirmation
of the ideas that occupied him.
The Emperor's manifesto was read, evoking enthusiasm, and then all moved
about discussing it. Besides the ordinary topics of conversation, Pierre heard
questions of where the marshals of the nobility were to stand when the
Emperor entered, when a ball should be given in the Emperor's honor, whether
they should group themselves by districts or by whole provinces... and so on;
but as soon as the war was touched on, or what the nobility had been convened
for, the talk became undecided and indefinite. Then all preferred listening to
speaking.
A middle-aged man, handsome and virile, in the uniform of a retired naval
officer, was speaking in one of the rooms, and a small crowd was pressing
round him. Pierre went up to the circle that had formed round the speaker and
listened. Count Ilya Rostov, in a military uniform of Catherine's time, was
sauntering with a pleasant smile among the crowd, with all of whom he was
acquainted. He too approached that group and listened with a kindly smile and
nods of approval, as he always did, to what the speaker was saying. The
retired naval man was speaking very boldly, as was evident from the
expression on the faces of the listeners and from the fact that some people
Pierre knew as the meekest and quietest of men walked away disapprovingly
or expressed disagreement with him. Pierre pushed his way into the middle of
the group, listened, and convinced himself that the man was indeed a liberal,
but of views quite different from his own. The naval officer spoke in a
particularly sonorous, musical, and aristocratic baritone voice, pleasantly
swallowing his r's and generally slurring his consonants: the voice of a man
calling out to his servant, "Heah! Bwing me my pipe!" It was indicative of
dissipation and the exercise of authority.
"What if the Smolensk people have offahd to waise militia for the Empewah?
Ah we to take Smolensk as our patte'n? If the noble awistocwacy of the
pwovince of Moscow thinks fit, it can show its loyalty to our sov'weign the
Empewah in other ways. Have we fo'gotten the waising of the militia in the
yeah 'seven? All that did was to enwich the pwiests' sons and thieves and
wobbahs...."
Count Ilya Rostov smiled blandly and nodded approval.
"And was our militia of any use to the Empia? Not at all! It only wuined our
farming! Bettah have another conscwiption... o' ou' men will wetu'n neithah
soldiers no' peasants, and we'll get only depwavity fwom them. The nobility
don't gwudge theah lives—evewy one of us will go and bwing in more
wecwuits, and the sov'weign" (that was the way he referred to the Emperor)
"need only say the word and we'll all die fo' him!" added the orator with
animation.
Count Rostov's mouth watered with pleasure and he nudged Pierre, but Pierre
wanted to speak himself. He pushed forward, feeling stirred, but not yet sure
what stirred him or what he would say. Scarcely had he opened his mouth
when one of the senators, a man without a tooth in his head, with a shrewd
though angry expression, standing near the first speaker, interrupted him.
Evidently accustomed to managing debates and to maintaining an argument,
he began in low but distinct tones:
"I imagine, sir," said he, mumbling with his toothless mouth, "that we have
been summoned here not to discuss whether it's best for the empire at the
present moment to adopt conscription or to call out the militia. We have been
summoned to reply to the appeal with which our sovereign the Emperor has
honored us. But to judge what is best—conscription or the militia—we can
leave to the supreme authority...."
Pierre suddenly saw an outlet for his excitement. He hardened his heart against
the senator who was introducing this set and narrow attitude into the
deliberations of the nobility. Pierre stepped forward and interrupted him. He
himself did not yet know what he would say, but he began to speak eagerly,
occasionally lapsing into French or expressing himself in bookish Russian.
"Excuse me, your excellency," he began. (He was well acquainted with the
senator, but thought it necessary on this occasion to address him formally.)
"Though I don't agree with the gentleman..." (he hesitated: he wished to say,
"Mon tres honorable preopinant"—"My very honorable opponent") "with the
gentleman... whom I have not the honor of knowing, I suppose that the
nobility have been summoned not merely to express their sympathy and
enthusiasm but also to consider the means by which we can assist our
Fatherland! I imagine," he went on, warming to his subject, "that the Emperor
himself would not be satisfied to find in us merely owners of serfs whom we
are willing to devote to his service, and chair a canon * we are ready to make
of ourselves—and not to obtain from us any co-co-counsel."
* "Food for cannon."
Many persons withdrew from the circle, noticing the senator's sarcastic smile
and the freedom of Pierre's remarks. Only Count Rostov was pleased with
them as he had been pleased with those of the naval officer, the senator, and in
general with whatever speech he had last heard.
"I think that before discussing these questions," Pierre continued, "we should
ask the Emperor—most respectfully ask His Majesty—to let us know the
number of our troops and the position in which our army and our forces now
are, and then..."
But scarcely had Pierre uttered these words before he was attacked from three
sides. The most vigorous attack came from an old acquaintance, a boston
player who had always been well disposed toward him, Stepan Stepanovich
Adraksin. Adraksin was in uniform, and whether as a result of the uniform or
from some other cause Pierre saw before him quite a different man. With a
sudden expression of malevolence on his aged face, Adraksin shouted at
Pierre:
"In the first place, I tell you we have no right to question the Emperor about
that, and secondly, if the Russian nobility had that right, the Emperor could not
answer such a question. The troops are moved according to the enemy's
movements and the number of men increases and decreases..."
Another voice, that of a nobleman of medium height and about forty years of
age, whom Pierre had formerly met at the gypsies' and knew as a bad
cardplayer, and who, also transformed by his uniform, came up to Pierre,
interrupted Adraksin.
"Yes, and this is not a time for discussing," he continued, "but for acting: there
is war in Russia! The enemy is advancing to destroy Russia, to desecrate the
tombs of our fathers, to carry off our wives and children." The nobleman
smote his breast. "We will all arise, every one of us will go, for our father the
Tsar!" he shouted, rolling his bloodshot eyes. Several approving voices were
heard in the crowd. "We are Russians and will not grudge our blood in defense
of our faith, the throne, and the Fatherland! We must cease raving if we are
sons of our Fatherland! We will show Europe how Russia rises to the defense
of Russia!"
Pierre wished to reply, but could not get in a word. He felt that his words,
apart from what meaning they conveyed, were less audible than the sound of
his opponent's voice.
Count Rostov at the back of the crowd was expressing approval; several
persons, briskly turning a shoulder to the orator at the end of a phrase, said:
"That's right, quite right! Just so!"
Pierre wished to say that he was ready to sacrifice his money, his serfs, or
himself, only one ought to know the state of affairs in order to be able to
improve it, but he was unable to speak. Many voices shouted and talked at the
same time, so that Count Rostov had not time to signify his approval of them
all, and the group increased, dispersed, re-formed, and then moved with a hum
of talk into the largest hall and to the big table. Not only was Pierre's attempt
to speak unsuccessful, but he was rudely interrupted, pushed aside, and people
turned away from him as from a common enemy. This happened not because
they were displeased by the substance of his speech, which had even been
forgotten after the many subsequent speeches, but to animate it the crowd
needed a tangible object to love and a tangible object to hate. Pierre became
the latter. Many other orators spoke after the excited nobleman, and all in the
same tone. Many spoke eloquently and with originality.
Glinka, the editor of the Russian Messenger, who was recognized (cries of
"author! author!" were heard in the crowd), said that "hell must be repulsed by
hell," and that he had seen a child smiling at lightning flashes and
thunderclaps, but "we will not be that child."
"Yes, yes, at thunderclaps!" was repeated approvingly in the back rows of the
crowd.
The crowd drew up to the large table, at which sat gray-haired or bald seventy-
year-old magnates, uniformed and besashed almost all of whom Pierre had
seen in their own homes with their buffoons, or playing boston at the clubs.
With an incessant hum of voices the crowd advanced to the table. Pressed by
the throng against the high backs of the chairs, the orators spoke one after
another and sometimes two together. Those standing behind noticed what a
speaker omitted to say and hastened to supply it. Others in that heat and crush
racked their brains to find some thought and hastened to utter it. The old
magnates, whom Pierre knew, sat and turned to look first at one and then at
another, and their faces for the most part only expressed the fact that they
found it very hot. Pierre, however, felt excited, and the general desire to show
that they were ready to go to all lengths—which found expression in the tones
and looks more than in the substance of the speeches—infected him too. He
did not renounce his opinions, but felt himself in some way to blame and
wished to justify himself.
"I only said that it would be more to the purpose to make sacrifices when we
know what is needed!" said he, trying to be heard above the other voices.
One of the old men nearest to him looked round, but his attention was
immediately diverted by an exclamation at the other side of the table.
"Yes, Moscow will be surrendered! She will be our expiation!" shouted one
man.
"He is the enemy of mankind!" cried another. "Allow me to speak...."
"Gentlemen, you are crushing me!..."
CHAPTER XXIII
At that moment Count Rostopchin with his protruding chin and alert eyes,
wearing the uniform of a general with sash over his shoulder, entered the
room, stepping briskly to the front of the crowd of gentry.
"Our sovereign the Emperor will be here in a moment," said Rostopchin. "I am
straight from the palace. Seeing the position we are in, I think there is little
need for discussion. The Emperor has deigned to summon us and the
merchants. Millions will pour forth from there"—he pointed to the merchants'
hall—"but our business is to supply men and not spare ourselves... That is the
least we can do!"
A conference took place confined to the magnates sitting at the table. The
whole consultation passed more than quietly. After all the preceding noise the
sound of their old voices saying one after another, "I agree," or for variety, "I
too am of that opinion," and so on had even a mournful effect.
The secretary was told to write down the resolution of the Moscow nobility
and gentry, that they would furnish ten men, fully equipped, out of every
thousand serfs, as the Smolensk gentry had done. Their chairs made a scraping
noise as the gentlemen who had conferred rose with apparent relief, and began
walking up and down, arm in arm, to stretch their legs and converse in
couples.
"The Emperor! The Emperor!" a sudden cry resounded through the halls and
the whole throng hurried to the entrance.
The Emperor entered the hall through a broad path between two lines of
nobles. Every face expressed respectful, awe-struck curiosity. Pierre stood
rather far off and could not hear all that the Emperor said. From what he did
hear he understood that the Emperor spoke of the danger threatening the
empire and of the hopes he placed on the Moscow nobility. He was answered
by a voice which informed him of the resolution just arrived at.
"Gentlemen!" said the Emperor with a quivering voice.
There was a rustling among the crowd and it again subsided, so that Pierre
distinctly heard the pleasantly human voice of the Emperor saying with
emotion:
"I never doubted the devotion of the Russian nobles, but today it has surpassed
my expectations. I thank you in the name of the Fatherland! Gentlemen, let us
act! Time is most precious..."
The Emperor ceased speaking, the crowd began pressing round him, and
rapturous exclamations were heard from all sides.
"Yes, most precious... a royal word," said Count Rostov, with a sob. He stood
at the back, and, though he had heard hardly anything, understood everything
in his own way.
From the hall of the nobility the Emperor went to that of the merchants. There
he remained about ten minutes. Pierre was among those who saw him come
out from the merchants' hall with tears of emotion in his eyes. As became
known later, he had scarcely begun to address the merchants before tears
gushed from his eyes and he concluded in a trembling voice. When Pierre saw
the Emperor he was coming out accompanied by two merchants, one of whom
Pierre knew, a fat otkupshchik. The other was the mayor, a man with a thin
sallow face and narrow beard. Both were weeping. Tears filled the thin man's
eyes, and the fat otkupshchik sobbed outright like a child and kept repeating:
"Our lives and property—take them, Your Majesty!"
Pierre's one feeling at the moment was a desire to show that he was ready to
go all lengths and was prepared to sacrifice everything. He now felt ashamed
of his speech with its constitutional tendency and sought an opportunity of
effacing it. Having heard that Count Mamonov was furnishing a regiment,
Bezukhov at once informed Rostopchin that he would give a thousand men
and their maintenance.
Old Rostov could not tell his wife of what had passed without tears, and at
once consented to Petya's request and went himself to enter his name.
Next day the Emperor left Moscow. The assembled nobles all took off their
uniforms and settled down again in their homes and clubs, and not without
some groans gave orders to their stewards about the enrollment, feeling
amazed themselves at what they had done.
t help donning a Polish uniform and yielding to the stimulating
influence of a June morning, and could not refrain from bursts of anger in the
presence of Kurakin and then of Balashev.
Alexander refused negotiations because he felt himself to be personally
insulted. Barclay de Tolly tried to command the army in the best way, because
he wished to fulfill his duty and earn fame as a great commander. Rostov
charged the French because he could not restrain his wish for a gallop across a
level field; and in the same way the innumerable people who took part in the
war acted in accord with their personal characteristics, habits, circumstances,
and aims. They were moved by fear or vanity, rejoiced or were indignant,
reasoned, imagining that they knew what they were doing and did it of their
own free will, but they all were involuntary tools of history, carrying on a
work concealed from them but comprehensible to us. Such is the inevitable
fate of men of action, and the higher they stand in the social hierarchy the less
are they free.
The actors of 1812 have long since left the stage, their personal interests have
vanished leaving no trace, and nothing remains of that time but its historic
results.
Providence compelled all these men, striving to attain personal aims, to further
the accomplishment of a stupendous result no one of them at all expected—
neither Napoleon, nor Alexander, nor still less any of those who did the actual
fighting.
The cause of the destruction of the French army in 1812 is clear to us now. No
one will deny that that cause was, on the one hand, its advance into the heart
of Russia late in the season without any preparation for a winter campaign
and, on the other, the character given to the war by the burning of Russian
towns and the hatred of the foe this aroused among the Russian people. But no
one at the time foresaw (what now seems so evident) that this was the only
way an army of eight hundred thousand men—the best in the world and led by
the best general—could be destroyed in conflict with a raw army of half its
numerical strength, and led by inexperienced commanders as the Russian
army was. Not only did no one see this, but on the Russian side every effort
was made to hinder the only thing that could save Russia, while on the French
side, despite Napoleon's experience and so-called military genius, every effort
was directed to pushing on to Moscow at the end of the summer, that is, to
doing the very thing that was bound to lead to destruction.
In historical works on the year 1812 French writers are very fond of saying
that Napoleon felt the danger of extending his line, that he sought a battle and
that his marshals advised him to stop at Smolensk, and of making similar
statements to show that the danger of the campaign was even then understood.
Russian authors are still fonder of telling us that from the commencement of
the campaign a Scythian war plan was adopted to lure Napoleon into the
depths of Russia, and this plan some of them attribute to Pfuel, others to a
certain Frenchman, others to Toll, and others again to Alexander himself—
pointing to notes, projects, and letters which contain hints of such a line of
action. But all these hints at what happened, both from the French side and the
Russian, are advanced only because they fit in with the event. Had that event
not occurred these hints would have been forgotten, as we have forgotten the
thousands and millions of hints and expectations to the contrary which were
current then but have now been forgotten because the event falsified them.
There are always so many conjectures as to the issue of any event that
however it may end there will always be people to say: "I said then that it
would be so," quite forgetting that amid their innumerable conjectures many
were to quite the contrary effect.
Conjectures as to Napoleon's awareness of the danger of extending his line,
and (on the Russian side) as to luring the enemy into the depths of Russia, are
evidently of that kind, and only by much straining can historians attribute such
conceptions to Napoleon and his marshals, or such plans to the Russian
commanders. All the facts are in flat contradiction to such conjectures. During
the whole period of the war not only was there no wish on the Russian side to
draw the French into the heart of the country, but from their first entry into
Russia everything was done to stop them. And not only was Napoleon not
afraid to extend his line, but he welcomed every step forward as a triumph and
did not seek battle as eagerly as in former campaigns, but very lazily.
At the very beginning of the war our armies were divided, and our sole aim
was to unite them, though uniting the armies was no advantage if we meant to
retire and lure the enemy into the depths of the country. Our Emperor joined
the army to encourage it to defend every inch of Russian soil and not to
retreat. The enormous Drissa camp was formed on Pfuel's plan, and there was
no intention of retiring farther. The Emperor reproached the commanders in
chief for every step they retired. He could not bear the idea of letting the
enemy even reach Smolensk, still less could he contemplate the burning of
Moscow, and when our armies did unite he was displeased that Smolensk was
abandoned and burned without a general engagement having been fought
under its walls.
So thought the Emperor, and the Russian commanders and people were still
more provoked at the thought that our forces were retreating into the depths of
the country.
Napoleon having cut our armies apart advanced far into the country and
missed several chances of forcing an engagement. In August he was at
Smolensk and thought only of how to advance farther, though as we now see
that advance was evidently ruinous to him.
The facts clearly show that Napoleon did not foresee the danger of the
advance on Moscow, nor did Alexander and the Russian commanders then
think of luring Napoleon on, but quite the contrary. The luring of Napoleon
into the depths of the country was not the result of any plan, for no one
believed it to be possible; it resulted from a most complex interplay of
intrigues, aims, and wishes among those who took part in the war and had no
perception whatever of the inevitable, or of the one way of saving Russia.
Everything came about fortuitously. The armies were divided at the
commencement of the campaign. We tried to unite them, with the evident
intention of giving battle and checking the enemy's advance, and by this effort
to unite them while avoiding battle with a much stronger enemy, and
necessarily withdrawing the armies at an acute angle—we led the French on to
Smolensk. But we withdrew at an acute angle not only because the French
advanced between our two armies; the angle became still more acute and we
withdrew still farther, because Barclay de Tolly was an unpopular foreigner
disliked by Bagration (who would come under his command), and Bagration
—being in command of the second army—tried to postpone joining up and
coming under Barclay's command as long as he could. Bagration was slow in
effecting the junction—though that was the chief aim of all at headquarters—
because, as he alleged, he exposed his army to danger on this march, and it
was best for him to retire more to the left and more to the south, worrying the
enemy from flank and rear and securing from the Ukraine recruits for his
army; and it looks as if he planned this in order not to come under the
command of the detested foreigner Barclay, whose rank was inferior to his
own.
The Emperor was with the army to encourage it, but his presence and
ignorance of what steps to take, and the enormous number of advisers and
plans, destroyed the first army's energy and it retired.
The intention was to make a stand at the Drissa camp, but Paulucci, aiming at
becoming commander-in-chief, unexpectedly employed his energy to
influence Alexander, and Pfuel's whole plan was abandoned and the command
entrusted to Barclay. But as Barclay did not inspire confidence his power was
limited. The armies were divided, there was no unity of command, and
Barclay was unpopular; but from this confusion, division, and the unpopularity
of the foreign commander-in-chief, there resulted on the one hand indecision
and the avoidance of a battle (which we could not have refrained from had the
armies been united and had someone else, instead of Barclay, been in
command) and on the other an ever-increasing indignation against the
foreigners and an increase in patriotic zeal.
At last the Emperor left the army, and as the most convenient and indeed the
only pretext for his departure it was decided that it was necessary for him to
inspire the people in the capitals and arouse the nation in general to a patriotic
war. And by this visit of the Emperor to Moscow the strength of the Russian
army was trebled.
He left in order not to obstruct the commander-in-chief's undivided control of
the army, and hoping that more decisive action would then be taken, but the
command of the armies became still more confused and enfeebled. Bennigsen,
the Tsarevich, and a swarm of adjutants general remained with the army to
keep the commander-in-chief under observation and arouse his energy, and
Barclay, feeling less free than ever under the observation of all these "eyes of
the Emperor," became still more cautious of undertaking any decisive action
and avoided giving battle.
Barclay stood for caution. The Tsarevich hinted at treachery and demanded a
general engagement. Lubomirski, Bronnitski, Wlocki, and the others of that
group stirred up so much trouble that Barclay, under pretext of sending papers
to the Emperor, dispatched these Polish adjutants general to Petersburg and
plunged into an open struggle with Bennigsen and the Tsarevich.
At Smolensk the armies at last reunited, much as Bagration disliked it.
Bagration drove up in a carriage to the house occupied by Barclay. Barclay
donned his sash and came out to meet and report to his senior officer
Bagration.
Despite his seniority in rank Bagration, in this contest of magnanimity, took
his orders from Barclay, but, having submitted, agreed with him less than ever.
By the Emperor's orders Bagration reported direct to him. He wrote to
Arakcheev, the Emperor's confidant: "It must be as my sovereign pleases, but I
cannot work with the Minister (meaning Barclay). For God's sake send me
somewhere else if only in command of a regiment. I cannot stand it here.
Headquarters are so full of Germans that a Russian cannot exist and there is no
sense in anything. I thought I was really serving my sovereign and the
Fatherland, but it turns out that I am serving Barclay. I confess I do not want
to."
The swarm of Bronnitskis and Wintzingerodes and their like still further
embittered the relations between the commanders in chief, and even less unity
resulted. Preparations were made to fight the French before Smolensk. A
general was sent to survey the position. This general, hating Barclay, rode to
visit a friend of his own, a corps commander, and, having spent the day with
him, returned to Barclay and condemned, as unsuitable from every point of
view, the battleground he had not seen.
While disputes and intrigues were going on about the future field of battle, and
while we were looking for the French—having lost touch with them—the
French stumbled upon Neverovski's division and reached the walls of
Smolensk.
It was necessary to fight an unexpected battle at Smolensk to save our lines of
communication. The battle was fought and thousands were killed on both
sides.
Smolensk was abandoned contrary to the wishes of the Emperor and of the
whole people. But Smolensk was burned by its own inhabitants-who had been
misled by their governor. And these ruined inhabitants, setting an example to
other Russians, went to Moscow thinking only of their own losses but kindling
hatred of the foe. Napoleon advanced farther and we retired, thus arriving at
the very result which caused his destruction.
CHAPTER II
The day after his son had left, Prince Nicholas sent for Princess Mary to come
to his study.
"Well? Are you satisfied now?" said he. "You've made me quarrel with my
son! Satisfied, are you? That's all you wanted! Satisfied?... It hurts me, it hurts.
I'm old and weak and this is what you wanted. Well then, gloat over it! Gloat
over it!"
After that Princess Mary did not see her father for a whole week. He was ill
and did not leave his study.
Princess Mary noticed to her surprise that during this illness the old prince not
only excluded her from his room, but did not admit Mademoiselle Bourienne
either. Tikhon alone attended him.
At the end of the week the prince reappeared and resumed his former way of
life, devoting himself with special activity to building operations and the
arrangement of the gardens and completely breaking off his relations with
Mademoiselle Bourienne. His looks and cold tone to his daughter seemed to
say: "There, you see? You plotted against me, you lied to Prince Andrew about
my relations with that Frenchwoman and made me quarrel with him, but you
see I need neither her nor you!"
Princess Mary spent half of every day with little Nicholas, watching his
lessons, teaching him Russian and music herself, and talking to Dessalles; the
rest of the day she spent over her books, with her old nurse, or with "God's
folk" who sometimes came by the back door to see her.
Of the war Princess Mary thought as women do think about wars. She feared
for her brother who was in it, was horrified by and amazed at the strange
cruelty that impels men to kill one another, but she did not understand the
significance of this war, which seemed to her like all previous wars. She did
not realize the significance of this war, though Dessalles with whom she
constantly conversed was passionately interested in its progress and tried to
explain his own conception of it to her, and though the "God's folk" who came
to see her reported, in their own way, the rumors current among the people of
an invasion by Antichrist, and though Julie (now Princess Drubetskaya), who
had resumed correspondence with her, wrote patriotic letters from Moscow.
"I write you in Russian, my good friend," wrote Julie in her Frenchified
Russian, "because I have a detestation for all the French, and the same for
their language which I cannot support to hear spoken.... We in Moscow are
elated by enthusiasm for our adored Emperor.
"My poor husband is enduring pains and hunger in Jewish taverns, but the
news which I have inspires me yet more.
"You heard probably of the heroic exploit of Raevski, embracing his two sons
and saying: 'I will perish with them but we will not be shaken!' And truly
though the enemy was twice stronger than we, we were unshakable. We pass
the time as we can, but in war as in war! The princesses Aline and Sophie sit
whole days with me, and we, unhappy widows of live men, make beautiful
conversations over our 'charpie', only you, my friend, are missing..." and so
on.
The chief reason Princess Mary did not realize the full significance of this war
was that the old prince never spoke of it, did not recognize it, and laughed at
Dessalles when he mentioned it at dinner. The prince's tone was so calm and
confident that Princess Mary unhesitatingly believed him.
All that July the old prince was exceedingly active and even animated. He
planned another garden and began a new building for the domestic serfs. The
only thing that made Princess Mary anxious about him was that he slept very
little and, instead of sleeping in his study as usual, changed his sleeping place
every day. One day he would order his camp bed to be set up in the glass
gallery, another day he remained on the couch or on the lounge chair in the
drawing room and dozed there without undressing, while—instead of
Mademoiselle Bourienne—a serf boy read to him. Then again he would spend
a night in the dining room.
On August 1, a second letter was received from Prince Andrew. In his first
letter which came soon after he had left home, Prince Andrew had dutifully
asked his father's forgiveness for what he had allowed himself to say and
begged to be restored to his favor. To this letter the old prince had replied
affectionately, and from that time had kept the Frenchwoman at a distance.
Prince Andrew's second letter, written near Vitebsk after the French had
occupied that town, gave a brief account of the whole campaign, enclosed for
them a plan he had drawn and forecasts as to the further progress of the war. In
this letter Prince Andrew pointed out to his father the danger of staying at Bald
Hills, so near the theater of war and on the army's direct line of march, and
advised him to move to Moscow.
At dinner that day, on Dessalles' mentioning that the French were said to have
already entered Vitebsk, the old prince remembered his son's letter.
"There was a letter from Prince Andrew today," he said to Princess Mary
—"Haven't you read it?"
"No, Father," she replied in a frightened voice.
She could not have read the letter as she did not even know it had arrived.
"He writes about this war," said the prince, with the ironic smile that had
become habitual to him in speaking of the present war.
"That must be very interesting," said Dessalles. "Prince Andrew is in a
position to know..."
"Oh, very interesting!" said Mademoiselle Bourienne.
"Go and get it for me," said the old prince to Mademoiselle Bourienne. "You
know—under the paperweight on the little table."
Mademoiselle Bourienne jumped up eagerly.
"No, don't!" he exclaimed with a frown. "You go, Michael Ivanovich."
Michael Ivanovich rose and went to the study. But as soon as he had left the
room the old prince, looking uneasily round, threw down his napkin and went
himself.
"They can't do anything... always make some muddle," he muttered.
While he was away Princess Mary, Dessalles, Mademoiselle Bourienne, and
even little Nicholas exchanged looks in silence. The old prince returned with
quick steps, accompanied by Michael Ivanovich, bringing the letter and a plan.
These he put down beside him—not letting anyone read them at dinner.
On moving to the drawing room he handed the letter to Princess Mary and,
spreading out before him the plan of the new building and fixing his eyes upon
it, told her to read the letter aloud. When she had done so Princess Mary
looked inquiringly at her father. He was examining the plan, evidently
engrossed in his own ideas.
"What do you think of it, Prince?" Dessalles ventured to ask.
"I? I?..." said the prince as if unpleasantly awakened, and not taking his eyes
from the plan of the building.
"Very possibly the theater of war will move so near to us that..."
"Ha ha ha! The theater of war!" said the prince. "I have said and still say that
the theater of war is Poland and the enemy will never get beyond the Niemen."
Dessalles looked in amazement at the prince, who was talking of the Niemen
when the enemy was already at the Dnieper, but Princess Mary, forgetting the
geographical position of the Niemen, thought that what her father was saying
was correct.
"When the snow melts they'll sink in the Polish swamps. Only they could fail
to see it," the prince continued, evidently thinking of the campaign of 1807
which seemed to him so recent. "Bennigsen should have advanced into Prussia
sooner, then things would have taken a different turn..."
"But, Prince," Dessalles began timidly, "the letter mentions Vitebsk...."
"Ah, the letter? Yes..." replied the prince peevishly. "Yes... yes..." His face
suddenly took on a morose expression. He paused. "Yes, he writes that the
French were beaten at... at... what river is it?"
Dessalles dropped his eyes.
"The prince says nothing about that," he remarked gently.
"Doesn't he? But I didn't invent it myself."
No one spoke for a long time.
"Yes... yes... Well, Michael Ivanovich," he suddenly went on, raising his head
and pointing to the plan of the building, "tell me how you mean to alter it...."
Michael Ivanovich went up to the plan, and the prince after speaking to him
about the building looked angrily at Princess Mary and Dessalles and went to
his own room.
Princess Mary saw Dessalles' embarrassed and astonished look fixed on her
father, noticed his silence, and was struck by the fact that her father had
forgotten his son's letter on the drawing-room table; but she was not only
afraid to speak of it and ask Dessalles the reason of his confusion and silence,
but was afraid even to think about it.
In the evening Michael Ivanovich, sent by the prince, came to Princess Mary
for Prince Andrew's letter which had been forgotten in the drawing room. She
gave it to him and, unpleasant as it was to her to do so, ventured to ask him
what her father was doing.
"Always busy," replied Michael Ivanovich with a respectfully ironic smile
which caused Princess Mary to turn pale. "He's worrying very much about the
new building. He has been reading a little, but now"—Michael Ivanovich went
on, lowering his voice—"now he's at his desk, busy with his will, I expect."
(One of the prince's favorite occupations of late had been the preparation of
some papers he meant to leave at his death and which he called his "will.")
"And Alpatych is being sent to Smolensk?" asked Princess Mary.
"Oh, yes, he has been waiting to start for some time."
CHAPTER III
When Michael Ivanovich returned to the study with the letter, the old prince,
with spectacles on and a shade over his eyes, was sitting at his open bureau
with screened candles, holding a paper in his outstretched hand, and in a
somewhat dramatic attitude was reading his manuscript—his "Remarks" as he
termed it—which was to be transmitted to the Emperor after his death.
When Michael Ivanovich went in there were tears in the prince's eyes evoked
by the memory of the time when the paper he was now reading had been
written. He took the letter from Michael Ivanovich's hand, put it in his pocket,
folded up his papers, and called in Alpatych who had long been waiting.
The prince had a list of things to be bought in Smolensk and, walking up and
down the room past Alpatych who stood by the door, he gave his instructions.
"First, notepaper—do you hear? Eight quires, like this sample, gilt-edged... it
must be exactly like the sample. Varnish, sealing wax, as in Michael
Ivanovich's list."
He paced up and down for a while and glanced at his notes.
"Then hand to the governor in person a letter about the deed."
Next, bolts for the doors of the new building were wanted and had to be of a
special shape the prince had himself designed, and a leather case had to be
ordered to keep the "will" in.
The instructions to Alpatych took over two hours and still the prince did not
let him go. He sat down, sank into thought, closed his eyes, and dozed off.
Alpatych made a slight movement.
"Well, go, go! If anything more is wanted I'll send after you."
Alpatych went out. The prince again went to his bureau, glanced into it,
fingered his papers, closed the bureau again, and sat down at the table to write
to the governor.
It was already late when he rose after sealing the letter. He wished to sleep, but
he knew he would not be able to and that most depressing thoughts came to
him in bed. So he called Tikhon and went through the rooms with him to show
him where to set up the bed for that night.
He went about looking at every corner. Every place seemed unsatisfactory, but
worst of all was his customary couch in the study. That couch was dreadful to
him, probably because of the oppressive thoughts he had had when lying there.
It was unsatisfactory everywhere, but the corner behind the piano in the sitting
room was better than other places: he had never slept there yet.
With the help of a footman Tikhon brought in the bedstead and began putting
it up.
"That's not right! That's not right!" cried the prince, and himself pushed it a
few inches from the corner and then closer in again.
"Well, at last I've finished, now I'll rest," thought the prince, and let Tikhon
undress him.
Frowning with vexation at the effort necessary to divest himself of his coat
and trousers, the prince undressed, sat down heavily on the bed, and appeared
to be meditating as he looked contemptuously at his withered yellow legs. He
was not meditating, but only deferring the moment of making the effort to lift
those legs up and turn over on the bed. "Ugh, how hard it is! Oh, that this toil
might end and you would release me!" thought he. Pressing his lips together
he made that effort for the twenty-thousandth time and lay down. But hardly
had he done so before he felt the bed rocking backwards and forwards beneath
him as if it were breathing heavily and jolting. This happened to him almost
every night. He opened his eyes as they were closing.
"No peace, damn them!" he muttered, angry he knew not with whom. "Ah yes,
there was something else important, very important, that I was keeping till I
should be in bed. The bolts? No, I told him about them. No, it was something,
something in the drawing room. Princess Mary talked some nonsense.
Dessalles, that fool, said something. Something in my pocket—can't
remember..."
"Tikhon, what did we talk about at dinner?"
"About Prince Michael..."
"Be quiet, quiet!" The prince slapped his hand on the table. "Yes, I know,
Prince Andrew's letter! Princess Mary read it. Dessalles said something about
Vitebsk. Now I'll read it."
He had the letter taken from his pocket and the table—on which stood a glass
of lemonade and a spiral wax candle—moved close to the bed, and putting on
his spectacles he began reading. Only now in the stillness of the night, reading
it by the faint light under the green shade, did he grasp its meaning for a
moment.
"The French at Vitebsk, in four days' march they may be at Smolensk; perhaps
are already there! Tikhon!" Tikhon jumped up. "No, no, I don't want
anything!" he shouted.
He put the letter under the candlestick and closed his eyes. And there rose
before him the Danube at bright noonday: reeds, the Russian camp, and
himself a young general without a wrinkle on his ruddy face, vigorous and
alert, entering Potemkin's gaily colored tent, and a burning sense of jealousy
of "the favorite" agitated him now as strongly as it had done then. He recalled
all the words spoken at that first meeting with Potemkin. And he saw before
him a plump, rather sallow-faced, short, stout woman, the Empress Mother,
with her smile and her words at her first gracious reception of him, and then
that same face on the catafalque, and the encounter he had with Zubov over
her coffin about his right to kiss her hand.
"Oh, quicker, quicker! To get back to that time and have done with all the
present! Quicker, quicker—and that they should leave me in peace!"
CHAPTER IV
Bald Hills, Prince Nicholas Bolkonski's estate, lay forty miles east from
Smolensk and two miles from the main road to Moscow.
The same evening that the prince gave his instructions to Alpatych, Dessalles,
having asked to see Princess Mary, told her that, as the prince was not very
well and was taking no steps to secure his safety, though from Prince Andrew's
letter it was evident that to remain at Bald Hills might be dangerous, he
respectfully advised her to send a letter by Alpatych to the Provincial
Governor at Smolensk, asking him to let her know the state of affairs and the
extent of the danger to which Bald Hills was exposed. Dessalles wrote this
letter to the Governor for Princess Mary, she signed it, and it was given to
Alpatych with instructions to hand it to the Governor and to come back as
quickly as possible if there was danger.
Having received all his orders Alpatych, wearing a white beaver hat—a
present from the prince—and carrying a stick as the prince did, went out
accompanied by his family. Three well-fed roans stood ready harnessed to a
small conveyance with a leather hood.
The larger bell was muffled and the little bells on the harness stuffed with
paper. The prince allowed no one at Bald Hills to drive with ringing bells; but
on a long journey Alpatych liked to have them. His satellites—the senior
clerk, a countinghouse clerk, a scullery maid, a cook, two old women, a little
pageboy, the coachman, and various domestic serfs—were seeing him off.
His daughter placed chintz-covered down cushions for him to sit on and
behind his back. His old sister-in-law popped in a small bundle, and one of the
coachmen helped him into the vehicle.
"There! There! Women's fuss! Women, women!" said Alpatych, puffing and
speaking rapidly just as the prince did, and he climbed into the trap.
After giving the clerk orders about the work to be done, Alpatych, not trying
to imitate the prince now, lifted the hat from his bald head and crossed himself
three times.
"If there is anything... come back, Yakov Alpatych! For Christ's sake think of
us!" cried his wife, referring to the rumors of war and the enemy.
"Women, women! Women's fuss!" muttered Alpatych to himself and started
on his journey, looking round at the fields of yellow rye and the still-green,
thickly growing oats, and at other quite black fields just being plowed a
second time.
As he went along he looked with pleasure at the year's splendid crop of corn,
scrutinized the strips of ryefield which here and there were already being
reaped, made his calculations as to the sowing and the harvest, and asked
himself whether he had not forgotten any of the prince's orders.
Having baited the horses twice on the way, he arrived at the town toward
evening on the fourth of August.
Alpatych kept meeting and overtaking baggage trains and troops on the road.
As he approached Smolensk he heard the sounds of distant firing, but these did
not impress him. What struck him most was the sight of a splendid field of
oats in which a camp had been pitched and which was being mown down by
the soldiers, evidently for fodder. This fact impressed Alpatych, but in
thinking about his own business he soon forgot it.
All the interests of his life for more than thirty years had been bounded by the
will of the prince, and he never went beyond that limit. Everything not
connected with the execution of the prince's orders did not interest and did not
even exist for Alpatych.
On reaching Smolensk on the evening of the fourth of August he put up in the
Gachina suburb across the Dnieper, at the inn kept by Ferapontov, where he
had been in the habit of putting up for the last thirty years. Some thirty years
ago Ferapontov, by Alpatych's advice, had bought a wood from the prince, had
begun to trade, and now had a house, an inn, and a corn dealer's shop in that
province. He was a stout, dark, red-faced peasant in the forties, with thick lips,
a broad knob of a nose, similar knobs over his black frowning brows, and a
round belly.
Wearing a waistcoat over his cotton shirt, Ferapontov was standing before his
shop which opened onto the street. On seeing Alpatych he went up to him.
"You're welcome, Yakov Alpatych. Folks are leaving the town, but you have
come to it," said he.
"Why are they leaving the town?" asked Alpatych.
"That's what I say. Folks are foolish! Always afraid of the French."
"Women's fuss, women's fuss!" said Alpatych.
"Just what I think, Yakov Alpatych. What I say is: orders have been given not
to let them in, so that must be right. And the peasants are asking three rubles
for carting—it isn't Christian!"
Yakov Alpatych heard without heeding. He asked for a samovar and for hay
for his horses, and when he had had his tea he went to bed.
All night long troops were moving past the inn. Next morning Alpatych
donned a jacket he wore only in town and went out on business. It was a sunny
morning and by eight o'clock it was already hot. "A good day for harvesting,"
thought Alpatych.
From beyond the town firing had been heard since early morning. At eight
o'clock the booming of cannon was added to the sound of musketry. Many
people were hurrying through the streets and there were many soldiers, but
cabs were still driving about, tradesmen stood at their shops, and service was
being held in the churches as usual. Alpatych went to the shops, to
government offices, to the post office, and to the Governor's. In the offices and
shops and at the post office everyone was talking about the army and about the
enemy who was already attacking the town, everybody was asking what
should be done, and all were trying to calm one another.
In front of the Governor's house Alpatych found a large number of people,
Cossacks, and a traveling carriage of the Governor's. At the porch he met two
of the landed gentry, one of whom he knew. This man, an ex-captain of police,
was saying angrily:
"It's no joke, you know! It's all very well if you're single. 'One man though
undone is but one,' as the proverb says, but with thirteen in your family and all
the property... They've brought us to utter ruin! What sort of governors are
they to do that? They ought to be hanged—the brigands!..."
"Oh come, that's enough!" said the other.
"What do I care? Let him hear! We're not dogs," said the ex-captain of police,
and looking round he noticed Alpatych.
"Oh, Yakov Alpatych! What have you come for?"
"To see the Governor by his excellency's order," answered Alpatych, lifting his
head and proudly thrusting his hand into the bosom of his coat as he always
did when he mentioned the prince.... "He has ordered me to inquire into the
position of affairs," he added.
"Yes, go and find out!" shouted the angry gentleman. "They've brought things
to such a pass that there are no carts or anything!... There it is again, do you
hear?" said he, pointing in the direction whence came the sounds of firing.
"They've brought us all to ruin... the brigands!" he repeated, and descended the
porch steps.
Alpatych swayed his head and went upstairs. In the waiting room were
tradesmen, women, and officials, looking silently at one another. The door of
the Governor's room opened and they all rose and moved forward. An official
ran out, said some words to a merchant, called a stout official with a cross
hanging on his neck to follow him, and vanished again, evidently wishing to
avoid the inquiring looks and questions addressed to him. Alpatych moved
forward and next time the official came out addressed him, one hand placed in
the breast of his buttoned coat, and handed him two letters.
"To his Honor Baron Asch, from General-in-Chief Prince Bolkonski," he
announced with such solemnity and significance that the official turned to him
and took the letters.
A few minutes later the Governor received Alpatych and hurriedly said to him:
"Inform the prince and princess that I knew nothing: I acted on the highest
instructions—here..." and he handed a paper to Alpatych. "Still, as the prince
is unwell my advice is that they should go to Moscow. I am just starting
myself. Inform them..."
But the Governor did not finish: a dusty perspiring officer ran into the room
and began to say something in French. The Governor's face expressed terror.
"Go," he said, nodding his head to Alpatych, and began questioning the
officer.
Eager, frightened, helpless glances were turned on Alpatych when he came out
of the Governor's room. Involuntarily listening now to the firing, which had
drawn nearer and was increasing in strength, Alpatych hurried to his inn. The
paper handed to him by the Governor said this:
"I assure you that the town of Smolensk is not in the slightest danger as yet
and it is unlikely that it will be threatened with any. I from the one side and
Prince Bagration from the other are marching to unite our forces before
Smolensk, which junction will be effected on the 22nd instant, and both
armies with their united forces will defend our compatriots of the province
entrusted to your care till our efforts shall have beaten back the enemies of our
Fatherland, or till the last warrior in our valiant ranks has perished. From this
you will see that you have a perfect right to reassure the inhabitants of
Smolensk, for those defended by two such brave armies may feel assured of
victory." (Instructions from Barclay de Tolly to Baron Asch, the civil governor
of Smolensk, 1812.)
People were anxiously roaming about the streets.
Carts piled high with household utensils, chairs, and cupboards kept emerging
from the gates of the yards and moving along the streets. Loaded carts stood at
the house next to Ferapontov's and women were wailing and lamenting as they
said good-by. A small watchdog ran round barking in front of the harnessed
horses.
Alpatych entered the innyard at a quicker pace than usual and went straight to
the shed where his horses and trap were. The coachman was asleep. He woke
him up, told him to harness, and went into the passage. From the host's room
came the sounds of a child crying, the despairing sobs of a woman, and the
hoarse angry shouting of Ferapontov. The cook began running hither and
thither in the passage like a frightened hen, just as Alpatych entered.
"He's done her to death. Killed the mistress!... Beat her... dragged her about
so!..."
"What for?" asked Alpatych.
"She kept begging to go away. She's a woman! 'Take me away,' says she, 'don't
let me perish with my little children! Folks,' she says, 'are all gone, so why,'
she says, 'don't we go?' And he began beating and pulling her about so!"
At these words Alpatych nodded as if in approval, and not wishing to hear
more went to the door of the room opposite the innkeeper's, where he had left
his purchases.
"You brute, you murderer!" screamed a thin, pale woman who, with a baby in
her arms and her kerchief torn from her head, burst through the door at that
moment and down the steps into the yard.
Ferapontov came out after her, but on seeing Alpatych adjusted his waistcoat,
smoothed his hair, yawned, and followed Alpatych into the opposite room.
"Going already?" said he.
Alpatych, without answering or looking at his host, sorted his packages and
asked how much he owed.
"We'll reckon up! Well, have you been to the Governor's?" asked Ferapontov.
"What has been decided?"
Alpatych replied that the Governor had not told him anything definite.
"With our business, how can we get away?" said Ferapontov. "We'd have to
pay seven rubles a cartload to Dorogobuzh and I tell them they're not
Christians to ask it! Selivanov, now, did a good stroke last Thursday—sold
flour to the army at nine rubles a sack. Will you have some tea?" he added.
While the horses were being harnessed Alpatych and Ferapontov over their tea
talked of the price of corn, the crops, and the good weather for harvesting.
"Well, it seems to be getting quieter," remarked Ferapontov, finishing his third
cup of tea and getting up. "Ours must have got the best of it. The orders were
not to let them in. So we're in force, it seems.... They say the other day
Matthew Ivanych Platov drove them into the river Marina and drowned some
eighteen thousand in one day."
Alpatych collected his parcels, handed them to the coachman who had come
in, and settled up with the innkeeper. The noise of wheels, hoofs, and bells was
heard from the gateway as a little trap passed out.
It was by now late in the afternoon. Half the street was in shadow, the other
half brightly lit by the sun. Alpatych looked out of the window and went to the
door. Suddenly the strange sound of a far-off whistling and thud was heard,
followed by a boom of cannon blending into a dull roar that set the windows
rattling.
He went out into the street: two men were running past toward the bridge.
From different sides came whistling sounds and the thud of cannon balls and
bursting shells falling on the town. But these sounds were hardly heard in
comparison with the noise of the firing outside the town and attracted little
attention from the inhabitants. The town was being bombarded by a hundred
and thirty guns which Napoleon had ordered up after four o'clock. The people
did not at once realize the meaning of this bombardment.
At first the noise of the falling bombs and shells only aroused curiosity.
Ferapontov's wife, who till then had not ceased wailing under the shed,
became quiet and with the baby in her arms went to the gate, listening to the
sounds and looking in silence at the people.
The cook and a shop assistant came to the gate. With lively curiosity everyone
tried to get a glimpse of the projectiles as they flew over their heads. Several
people came round the corner talking eagerly.
"What force!" remarked one. "Knocked the roof and ceiling all to splinters!"
"Routed up the earth like a pig," said another.
"That's grand, it bucks one up!" laughed the first. "Lucky you jumped aside, or
it would have wiped you out!"
Others joined those men and stopped and told how cannon balls had fallen on
a house close to them. Meanwhile still more projectiles, now with the swift
sinister whistle of a cannon ball, now with the agreeable intermittent whistle
of a shell, flew over people's heads incessantly, but not one fell close by, they
all flew over. Alpatych was getting into his trap. The innkeeper stood at the
gate.
"What are you staring at?" he shouted to the cook, who in her red skirt, with
sleeves rolled up, swinging her bare elbows, had stepped to the corner to listen
to what was being said.
"What marvels!" she exclaimed, but hearing her master's voice she turned
back, pulling down her tucked-up skirt.
Once more something whistled, but this time quite close, swooping
downwards like a little bird; a flame flashed in the middle of the street,
something exploded, and the street was shrouded in smoke.
"Scoundrel, what are you doing?" shouted the innkeeper, rushing to the cook.
At that moment the pitiful wailing of women was heard from different sides,
the frightened baby began to cry, and people crowded silently with pale faces
round the cook. The loudest sound in that crowd was her wailing.
"Oh-h-h! Dear souls, dear kind souls! Don't let me die! My good souls!..."
Five minutes later no one remained in the street. The cook, with her thigh
broken by a shell splinter, had been carried into the kitchen. Alpatych, his
coachman, Ferapontov's wife and children and the house porter were all sitting
in the cellar, listening. The roar of guns, the whistling of projectiles, and the
piteous moaning of the cook, which rose above the other sounds, did not cease
for a moment. The mistress rocked and hushed her baby and when anyone
came into the cellar asked in a pathetic whisper what had become of her
husband who had remained in the street. A shopman who entered told her that
her husband had gone with others to the cathedral, whence they were fetching
the wonder-working icon of Smolensk.
Toward dusk the cannonade began to subside. Alpatych left the cellar and
stopped in the doorway. The evening sky that had been so clear was clouded
with smoke, through which, high up, the sickle of the new moon shone
strangely. Now that the terrible din of the guns had ceased a hush seemed to
reign over the town, broken only by the rustle of footsteps, the moaning, the
distant cries, and the crackle of fires which seemed widespread everywhere.
The cook's moans had now subsided. On two sides black curling clouds of
smoke rose and spread from the fires. Through the streets soldiers in various
uniforms walked or ran confusedly in different directions like ants from a
ruined ant-hill. Several of them ran into Ferapontov's yard before Alpatych's
eyes. Alpatych went out to the gate. A retreating regiment, thronging and
hurrying, blocked the street.
Noticing him, an officer said: "The town is being abandoned. Get away, get
away!" and then, turning to the soldiers, shouted:
"I'll teach you to run into the yards!"
Alpatych went back to the house, called the coachman, and told him to set off.
Ferapontov's whole household came out too, following Alpatych and the
coachman. The women, who had been silent till then, suddenly began to wail
as they looked at the fires—the smoke and even the flames of which could be
seen in the failing twilight—and as if in reply the same kind of lamentation
was heard from other parts of the street. Inside the shed Alpatych and the
coachman arranged the tangled reins and traces of their horses with trembling
hands.
As Alpatych was driving out of the gate he saw some ten soldiers in
Ferapontov's open shop, talking loudly and filling their bags and knapsacks
with flour and sunflower seeds. Just then Ferapontov returned and entered his
shop. On seeing the soldiers he was about to shout at them, but suddenly
stopped and, clutching at his hair, burst into sobs and laughter:
"Loot everything, lads! Don't let those devils get it!" he cried, taking some
bags of flour himself and throwing them into the street.
Some of the soldiers were frightened and ran away, others went on filling their
bags. On seeing Alpatych, Ferapontov turned to him:
"Russia is done for!" he cried. "Alpatych, I'll set the place on fire myself.
We're done for!..." and Ferapontov ran into the yard.
Soldiers were passing in a constant stream along the street blocking it
completely, so that Alpatych could not pass out and had to wait. Ferapontov's
wife and children were also sitting in a cart waiting till it was possible to drive
out.
Night had come. There were stars in the sky and the new moon shone out amid
the smoke that screened it. On the sloping descent to the Dnieper Alpatych's
cart and that of the innkeeper's wife, which were slowly moving amid the rows
of soldiers and of other vehicles, had to stop. In a side street near the
crossroads where the vehicles had stopped, a house and some shops were on
fire. This fire was already burning itself out. The flames now died down and
were lost in the black smoke, now suddenly flared up again brightly, lighting
up with strange distinctness the faces of the people crowding at the crossroads.
Black figures flitted about before the fire, and through the incessant crackling
of the flames talking and shouting could be heard. Seeing that his trap would
not be able to move on for some time, Alpatych got down and turned into the
side street to look at the fire. Soldiers were continually rushing backwards and
forwards near it, and he saw two of them and a man in a frieze coat dragging
burning beams into another yard across the street, while others carried bundles
of hay.
Alpatych went up to a large crowd standing before a high barn which was
blazing briskly. The walls were all on fire and the back wall had fallen in, the
wooden roof was collapsing, and the rafters were alight. The crowd was
evidently watching for the roof to fall in, and Alpatych watched for it too.
"Alpatych!" a familiar voice suddenly hailed the old man.
"Mercy on us! Your excellency!" answered Alpatych, immediately
recognizing the voice of his young prince.
Prince Andrew in his riding cloak, mounted on a black horse, was looking at
Alpatych from the back of the crowd.
"Why are you here?" he asked.
"Your... your excellency," stammered Alpatych and broke into sobs. "Are we
really lost? Master!..."
"Why are you here?" Prince Andrew repeated.
At that moment the flames flared up and showed his young master's pale worn
face. Alpatych told how he had been sent there and how difficult it was to get
away.
"Are we really quite lost, your excellency?" he asked again.
Prince Andrew without replying took out a notebook and raising his knee
began writing in pencil on a page he tore out. He wrote to his sister:
"Smolensk is being abandoned. Bald Hills will be occupied by the enemy
within a week. Set off immediately for Moscow. Let me know at once when
you will start. Send by special messenger to Usvyazh."
Having written this and given the paper to Alpatych, he told him how to
arrange for departure of the prince, the princess, his son, and the boy's tutor,
and how and where to let him know immediately. Before he had had time to
finish giving these instructions, a chief of staff followed by a suite galloped up
to him.
"You are a colonel?" shouted the chief of staff with a German accent, in a
voice familiar to Prince Andrew. "Houses are set on fire in your presence and
you stand by! What does this mean? You will answer for it!" shouted Berg,
who was now assistant to the chief of staff of the commander of the left flank
of the infantry of the first army, a place, as Berg said, "very agreeable and well
en evidence."
Prince Andrew looked at him and without replying went on speaking to
Alpatych.
"So tell them that I shall await a reply till the tenth, and if by the tenth I don't
receive news that they have all got away I shall have to throw up everything
and come myself to Bald Hills."
"Prince," said Berg, recognizing Prince Andrew, "I only spoke because I have
to obey orders, because I always do obey exactly.... You must please excuse
me," he went on apologetically.
Something cracked in the flames. The fire died down for a moment and
wreaths of black smoke rolled from under the roof. There was another terrible
crash and something huge collapsed.
"Ou-rou-rou!" yelled the crowd, echoing the crash of the collapsing roof of the
barn, the burning grain in which diffused a cakelike aroma all around. The
flames flared up again, lighting the animated, delighted, exhausted faces of the
spectators.
The man in the frieze coat raised his arms and shouted:
"It's fine, lads! Now it's raging... It's fine!"
"That's the owner himself," cried several voices.
"Well then," continued Prince Andrew to Alpatych, "report to them as I have
told you"; and not replying a word to Berg who was now mute beside him, he
touched his horse and rode down the side street.
CHAPTER V
From Smolensk the troops continued to retreat, followed by the enemy. On the
tenth of August the regiment Prince Andrew commanded was marching along
the highroad past the avenue leading to Bald Hills. Heat and drought had
continued for more than three weeks. Each day fleecy clouds floated across
the sky and occasionally veiled the sun, but toward evening the sky cleared
again and the sun set in reddish-brown mist. Heavy night dews alone refreshed
the earth. The unreaped corn was scorched and shed its grain. The marshes
dried up. The cattle lowed from hunger, finding no food on the sun-parched
meadows. Only at night and in the forests while the dew lasted was there any
freshness. But on the road, the highroad along which the troops marched, there
was no such freshness even at night or when the road passed through the
forest; the dew was imperceptible on the sandy dust churned up more than six
inches deep. As soon as day dawned the march began. The artillery and
baggage wagons moved noiselessly through the deep dust that rose to the very
hubs of the wheels, and the infantry sank ankle-deep in that soft, choking, hot
dust that never cooled even at night. Some of this dust was kneaded by the feet
and wheels, while the rest rose and hung like a cloud over the troops, settling
in eyes, ears, hair, and nostrils, and worst of all in the lungs of the men and
beasts as they moved along that road. The higher the sun rose the higher rose
that cloud of dust, and through the screen of its hot fine particles one could
look with naked eye at the sun, which showed like a huge crimson ball in the
unclouded sky. There was no wind, and the men choked in that motionless
atmosphere. They marched with handkerchiefs tied over their noses and
mouths. When they passed through a village they all rushed to the wells and
fought for the water and drank it down to the mud.
Prince Andrew was in command of a regiment, and the management of that
regiment, the welfare of the men and the necessity of receiving and giving
orders, engrossed him. The burning of Smolensk and its abandonment made
an epoch in his life. A novel feeling of anger against the foe made him forget
his own sorrow. He was entirely devoted to the affairs of his regiment and was
considerate and kind to his men and officers. In the regiment they called him
"our prince," were proud of him and loved him. But he was kind and gentle
only to those of his regiment, to Timokhin and the like—people quite new to
him, belonging to a different world and who could not know and understand
his past. As soon as he came across a former acquaintance or anyone from the
staff, he bristled up immediately and grew spiteful, ironical, and
contemptuous. Everything that reminded him of his past was repugnant to
him, and so in his relations with that former circle he confined himself to
trying to do his duty and not to be unfair.
In truth everything presented itself in a dark and gloomy light to Prince
Andrew, especially after the abandonment of Smolensk on the sixth of August
(he considered that it could and should have been defended) and after his sick
father had had to flee to Moscow, abandoning to pillage his dearly beloved
Bald Hills which he had built and peopled. But despite this, thanks to his
regiment, Prince Andrew had something to think about entirely apart from
general questions. Two days previously he had received news that his father,
son, and sister had left for Moscow; and though there was nothing for him to
do at Bald Hills, Prince Andrew with a characteristic desire to foment his own
grief decided that he must ride there.
He ordered his horse to be saddled and, leaving his regiment on the march,
rode to his father's estate where he had been born and spent his childhood.
Riding past the pond where there used always to be dozens of women
chattering as they rinsed their linen or beat it with wooden beetles, Prince
Andrew noticed that there was not a soul about and that the little washing
wharf, torn from its place and half submerged, was floating on its side in the
middle of the pond. He rode to the keeper's lodge. No one at the stone entrance
gates of the drive and the door stood open. Grass had already begun to grow
on the garden paths, and horses and calves were straying in the English park.
Prince Andrew rode up to the hothouse; some of the glass panes were broken,
and of the trees in tubs some were overturned and others dried up. He called
for Taras the gardener, but no one replied. Having gone round the corner of the
hothouse to the ornamental garden, he saw that the carved garden fence was
broken and branches of the plum trees had been torn off with the fruit. An old
peasant whom Prince Andrew in his childhood had often seen at the gate was
sitting on a green garden seat, plaiting a bast shoe.
He was deaf and did not hear Prince Andrew ride up. He was sitting on the
seat the old prince used to like to sit on, and beside him strips of bast were
hanging on the broken and withered branch of a magnolia.
Prince Andrew rode up to the house. Several limes in the old garden had been
cut down and a piebald mare and her foal were wandering in front of the house
among the rosebushes. The shutters were all closed, except at one window
which was open. A little serf boy, seeing Prince Andrew, ran into the house.
Alpatych, having sent his family away, was alone at Bald Hills and was sitting
indoors reading the Lives of the Saints. On hearing that Prince Andrew had
come, he went out with his spectacles on his nose, buttoning his coat, and,
hastily stepping up, without a word began weeping and kissing Prince
Andrew's knee.
Then, vexed at his own weakness, he turned away and began to report on the
position of affairs. Everything precious and valuable had been removed to
Bogucharovo. Seventy quarters of grain had also been carted away. The hay
and the spring corn, of which Alpatych said there had been a remarkable crop
that year, had been commandeered by the troops and mown down while still
green. The peasants were ruined; some of them too had gone to Bogucharovo,
only a few remained.
Without waiting to hear him out, Prince Andrew asked:
"When did my father and sister leave?" meaning when did they leave for
Moscow.
Alpatych, understanding the question to refer to their departure for
Bogucharovo, replied that they had left on the seventh and again went into
details concerning the estate management, asking for instructions.
"Am I to let the troops have the oats, and to take a receipt for them? We have
still six hundred quarters left," he inquired.
"What am I to say to him?" thought Prince Andrew, looking down on the old
man's bald head shining in the sun and seeing by the expression on his face
that the old man himself understood how untimely such questions were and
only asked them to allay his grief.
"Yes, let them have it," replied Prince Andrew.
"If you noticed some disorder in the garden," said Alpatych, "it was
impossible to prevent it. Three regiments have been here and spent the night,
dragoons mostly. I took down the name and rank of their commanding officer,
to hand in a complaint about it."
"Well, and what are you going to do? Will you stay here if the enemy occupies
the place?" asked Prince Andrew.
Alpatych turned his face to Prince Andrew, looked at him, and suddenly with a
solemn gesture raised his arm.
"He is my refuge! His will be done!" he exclaimed.
A group of bareheaded peasants was approaching across the meadow toward
the prince.
"Well, good-by!" said Prince Andrew, bending over to Alpatych. "You must go
away too, take away what you can and tell the serfs to go to the Ryazan estate
or to the one near Moscow."
Alpatych clung to Prince Andrew's leg and burst into sobs. Gently disengaging
himself, the prince spurred his horse and rode down the avenue at a gallop.
The old man was still sitting in the ornamental garden, like a fly impassive on
the face of a loved one who is dead, tapping the last on which he was making
the bast shoe, and two little girls, running out from the hot house carrying in
their skirts plums they had plucked from the trees there, came upon Prince
Andrew. On seeing the young master, the elder one with frightened look
clutched her younger companion by the hand and hid with her behind a birch
tree, not stopping to pick up some green plums they had dropped.
Prince Andrew turned away with startled haste, unwilling to let them see that
they had been observed. He was sorry for the pretty frightened little girl, was
afraid of looking at her, and yet felt an irresistible desire to do so. A new
sensation of comfort and relief came over him when, seeing these girls, he
realized the existence of other human interests entirely aloof from his own and
just as legitimate as those that occupied him. Evidently these girls passionately
desired one thing—to carry away and eat those green plums without being
caught—and Prince Andrew shared their wish for the success of their
enterprise. He could not resist looking at them once more. Believing their
danger past, they sprang from their ambush and, chirruping something in their
shrill little voices and holding up their skirts, their bare little sunburned feet
scampered merrily and quickly across the meadow grass.
Prince Andrew was somewhat refreshed by having ridden off the dusty
highroad along which the troops were moving. But not far from Bald Hills he
again came out on the road and overtook his regiment at its halting place by
the dam of a small pond. It was past one o'clock. The sun, a red ball through
the dust, burned and scorched his back intolerably through his black coat. The
dust always hung motionless above the buzz of talk that came from the resting
troops. There was no wind. As he crossed the dam Prince Andrew smelled the
ooze and freshness of the pond. He longed to get into that water, however dirty
it might be, and he glanced round at the pool from whence came sounds of
shrieks and laughter. The small, muddy, green pond had risen visibly more
than a foot, flooding the dam, because it was full of the naked white bodies of
soldiers with brick-red hands, necks, and faces, who were splashing about in
it. All this naked white human flesh, laughing and shrieking, floundered about
in that dirty pool like carp stuffed into a watering can, and the suggestion of
merriment in that floundering mass rendered it specially pathetic.
One fair-haired young soldier of the third company, whom Prince Andrew
knew and who had a strap round the calf of one leg, crossed himself, stepped
back to get a good run, and plunged into the water; another, a dark
noncommissioned officer who was always shaggy, stood up to his waist in the
water joyfully wriggling his muscular figure and snorted with satisfaction as
he poured the water over his head with hands blackened to the wrists. There
were sounds of men slapping one another, yelling, and puffing.
Everywhere on the bank, on the dam, and in the pond, there was healthy,
white, muscular flesh. The officer, Timokhin, with his red little nose, standing
on the dam wiping himself with a towel, felt confused at seeing the prince, but
made up his mind to address him nevertheless.
"It's very nice, your excellency! Wouldn't you like to?" said he.
"It's dirty," replied Prince Andrew, making a grimace.
"We'll clear it out for you in a minute," said Timokhin, and, still undressed, ran
off to clear the men out of the pond.
"The prince wants to bathe."
"What prince? Ours?" said many voices, and the men were in such haste to
clear out that the prince could hardly stop them. He decided that he would
rather wash himself with water in the barn.
"Flesh, bodies, cannon fodder!" he thought, and he looked at his own naked
body and shuddered, not from cold but from a sense of disgust and horror he
did not himself understand, aroused by the sight of that immense number of
bodies splashing about in the dirty pond.
On the seventh of August Prince Bagration wrote as follows from his quarters
at Mikhaylovna on the Smolensk road:
Dear Count Alexis Andreevich—(He was writing to Arakcheev but knew that
his letter would be read by the Emperor, and therefore weighed every word in
it to the best of his ability.)
I expect the Minister (Barclay de Tolly) has already reported the abandonment
of Smolensk to the enemy. It is pitiable and sad, and the whole army is in
despair that this most important place has been wantonly abandoned. I, for my
part, begged him personally most urgently and finally wrote him, but nothing
would induce him to consent. I swear to you on my honor that Napoleon was
in such a fix as never before and might have lost half his army but could not
have taken Smolensk. Our troops fought, and are fighting, as never before.
With fifteen thousand men I held the enemy at bay for thirty-five hours and
beat him; but he would not hold out even for fourteen hours. It is disgraceful, a
stain on our army, and as for him, he ought, it seems to me, not to live. If he
reports that our losses were great, it is not true; perhaps about four thousand,
not more, and not even that; but even were they ten thousand, that's war! But
the enemy has lost masses...
What would it have cost him to hold out for another two days? They would
have had to retire of their own accord, for they had no water for men or horses.
He gave me his word he would not retreat, but suddenly sent instructions that
he was retiring that night. We cannot fight in this way, or we may soon bring
the enemy to Moscow...
There is a rumor that you are thinking of peace. God forbid that you should
make peace after all our sacrifices and such insane retreats! You would set all
Russia against you and every one of us would feel ashamed to wear the
uniform. If it has come to this—we must fight as long as Russia can and as
long as there are men able to stand...
One man ought to be in command, and not two. Your Minister may perhaps be
good as a Minister, but as a general he is not merely bad but execrable, yet to
him is entrusted the fate of our whole country.... I am really frantic with
vexation; forgive my writing boldly. It is clear that the man who advocates the
conclusion of a peace, and that the Minister should command the army, does
not love our sovereign and desires the ruin of us all. So I write you frankly:
call out the militia. For the Minister is leading these visitors after him to
Moscow in a most masterly way. The whole army feels great suspicion of the
Imperial aide-de-camp Wolzogen. He is said to be more Napoleon's man than
ours, and he is always advising the Minister. I am not merely civil to him but
obey him like a corporal, though I am his senior. This is painful, but, loving
my benefactor and sovereign, I submit. Only I am sorry for the Emperor that
he entrusts our fine army to such as he. Consider that on our retreat we have
lost by fatigue and left in the hospital more than fifteen thousand men, and had
we attacked this would not have happened. Tell me, for God's sake, what will
Russia, our mother Russia, say to our being so frightened, and why are we
abandoning our good and gallant Fatherland to such rabble and implanting
feelings of hatred and shame in all our subjects? What are we scared at and of
whom are we afraid? I am not to blame that the Minister is vacillating, a
coward, dense, dilatory, and has all bad qualities. The whole army bewails it
and calls down curses upon him...
CHAPTER VI
Among the innumerable categories applicable to the phenomena of human life
one may discriminate between those in which substance prevails and those in
which form prevails. To the latter—as distinguished from village, country,
provincial, or even Moscow life—we may allot Petersburg life, and especially
the life of its salons. That life of the salons is unchanging. Since the year 1805
we had made peace and had again quarreled with Bonaparte and had made
constitutions and unmade them again, but the salons of Anna Pavlovna and
Helene remained just as they had been—the one seven and the other five years
before. At Anna Pavlovna's they talked with perplexity of Bonaparte's
successes just as before and saw in them and in the subservience shown to him
by the European sovereigns a malicious conspiracy, the sole object of which
was to cause unpleasantness and anxiety to the court circle of which Anna
Pavlovna was the representative. And in Helene's salon, which Rumyantsev
himself honored with his visits, regarding Helene as a remarkably intelligent
woman, they talked with the same ecstasy in 1812 as in 1808 of the "great
nation" and the "great man," and regretted our rupture with France, a rupture
which, according to them, ought to be promptly terminated by peace.
Of late, since the Emperor's return from the army, there had been some
excitement in these conflicting salon circles and some demonstrations of
hostility to one another, but each camp retained its own tendency. In Anna
Pavlovna's circle only those Frenchmen were admitted who were deep-rooted
legitimists, and patriotic views were expressed to the effect that one ought not
to go to the French theater and that to maintain the French troupe was costing
the government as much as a whole army corps. The progress of the war was
eagerly followed, and only the reports most flattering to our army were
circulated. In the French circle of Helene and Rumyantsev the reports of the
cruelty of the enemy and of the war were contradicted and all Napoleon's
attempts at conciliation were discussed. In that circle they discountenanced
those who advised hurried preparations for a removal to Kazan of the court
and the girls' educational establishments under the patronage of the Dowager
Empress. In Helene's circle the war in general was regarded as a series of
formal demonstrations which would very soon end in peace, and the view
prevailed expressed by Bilibin—who now in Petersburg was quite at home in
Helene's house, which every clever man was obliged to visit—that not by
gunpowder but by those who invented it would matters be settled. In that
circle the Moscow enthusiasm—news of which had reached Petersburg
simultaneously with the Emperor's return—was ridiculed sarcastically and
very cleverly, though with much caution.
Anna Pavlovna's circle on the contrary was enraptured by this enthusiasm and
spoke of it as Plutarch speaks of the deeds of the ancients. Prince Vasili, who
still occupied his former important posts, formed a connecting link between
these two circles. He visited his "good friend Anna Pavlovna" as well as his
daughter's "diplomatic salon," and often in his constant comings and goings
between the two camps became confused and said at Helene's what he should
have said at Anna Pavlovna's and vice versa.
Soon after the Emperor's return Prince Vasili in a conversation about the war
at Anna Pavlovna's severely condemned Barclay de Tolly, but was undecided
as to who ought to be appointed commander-in-chief. One of the visitors,
usually spoken of as "a man of great merit," having described how he had that
day seen Kutuzov, the newly chosen chief of the Petersburg militia, presiding
over the enrollment of recruits at the Treasury, cautiously ventured to suggest
that Kutuzov would be the man to satisfy all requirements.
Anna Pavlovna remarked with a melancholy smile that Kutuzov had done
nothing but cause the Emperor annoyance.
"I have talked and talked at the Assembly of the Nobility," Prince Vasili
interrupted, "but they did not listen to me. I told them his election as chief of
the militia would not please the Emperor. They did not listen to me.
"It's all this mania for opposition," he went on. "And who for? It is all because
we want to ape the foolish enthusiasm of those Muscovites," Prince Vasili
continued, forgetting for a moment that though at Helene's one had to ridicule
the Moscow enthusiasm, at Anna Pavlovna's one had to be ecstatic about it.
But he retrieved his mistake at once. "Now, is it suitable that Count Kutuzov,
the oldest general in Russia, should preside at that tribunal? He will get
nothing for his pains! How could they make a man commander-in-chief who
cannot mount a horse, who drops asleep at a council, and has the very worst
morals! A good reputation he made for himself at Bucharest! I don't speak of
his capacity as a general, but at a time like this how they appoint a decrepit,
blind old man, positively blind? A fine idea to have a blind general! He can't
see anything. To play blindman's bluff? He can't see at all!"
No one replied to his remarks.
This was quite correct on the twenty-fourth of July. But on the twenty-ninth of
July Kutuzov received the title of Prince. This might indicate a wish to get rid
of him, and therefore Prince Vasili's opinion continued to be correct though he
was not now in any hurry to express it. But on the eighth of August a
committee, consisting of Field Marshal Saltykov, Arakcheev, Vyazmitinov,
Lopukhin, and Kochubey met to consider the progress of the war. This
committee came to the conclusion that our failures were due to a want of unity
in the command and though the members of the committee were aware of the
Emperor's dislike of Kutuzov, after a short deliberation they agreed to advise
his appointment as commander in chief. That same day Kutuzov was
appointed commander-in-chief with full powers over the armies and over the
whole region occupied by them.
On the ninth of August Prince Vasili at Anna Pavlovna's again met the "man of
great merit." The latter was very attentive to Anna Pavlovna because he
wanted to be appointed director of one of the educational establishments for
young ladies. Prince Vasili entered the room with the air of a happy conqueror
who has attained the object of his desires.
"Well, have you heard the great news? Prince Kutuzov is field marshal! All
dissensions are at an end! I am so glad, so delighted! At last we have a man!"
said he, glancing sternly and significantly round at everyone in the drawing
room.
The "man of great merit," despite his desire to obtain the post of director,
could not refrain from reminding Prince Vasili of his former opinion. Though
this was impolite to Prince Vasili in Anna Pavlovna's drawing room, and also
to Anna Pavlovna herself who had received the news with delight, he could
not resist the temptation.
"But, Prince, they say he is blind!" said he, reminding Prince Vasili of his own
words.
"Eh? Nonsense! He sees well enough," said Prince Vasili rapidly, in a deep
voice and with a slight cough—the voice and cough with which he was wont
to dispose of all difficulties.
"He sees well enough," he added. "And what I am so pleased about," he went
on, "is that our sovereign has given him full powers over all the armies and the
whole region—powers no commander-in-chief ever had before. He is a second
autocrat," he concluded with a victorious smile.
"God grant it! God grant it!" said Anna Pavlovna.
The "man of great merit," who was still a novice in court circles, wishing to
flatter Anna Pavlovna by defending her former position on this question,
observed:
"It is said that the Emperor was reluctant to give Kutuzov those powers. They
say he blushed like a girl to whom Joconde is read, when he said to Kutuzov:
'Your Emperor and the Fatherland award you this honor.'"
"Perhaps the heart took no part in that speech," said Anna Pavlovna.
"Oh, no, no!" warmly rejoined Prince Vasili, who would not now yield
Kutuzov to anyone; in his opinion Kutuzov was not only admirable himself,
but was adored by everybody. "No, that's impossible," said he, "for our
sovereign appreciated him so highly before."
"God grant only that Prince Kutuzov assumes real power and does not allow
anyone to put a spoke in his wheel," observed Anna Pavlovna.
Understanding at once to whom she alluded, Prince Vasili said in a whisper:
"I know for a fact that Kutuzov made it an absolute condition that the
Tsarevich should not be with the army. Do you know what he said to the
Emperor?"
And Prince Vasili repeated the words supposed to have been spoken by
Kutuzov to the Emperor. "I can neither punish him if he does wrong nor
reward him if he does right."
"Oh, a very wise man is Prince Kutuzov! I have known him a long time!"
"They even say," remarked the "man of great merit" who did not yet possess
courtly tact, "that his excellency made it an express condition that the
sovereign himself should not be with the army."
As soon as he said this both Prince Vasili and Anna Pavlovna turned away
from him and glanced sadly at one another with a sigh at his naivete.
CHAPTER VII
While this was taking place in Petersburg the French had already passed
Smolensk and were drawing nearer and nearer to Moscow. Napoleon's
historian Thiers, like other of his historians, trying to justify his hero says that
he was drawn to the walls of Moscow against his will. He is as right as other
historians who look for the explanation of historic events in the will of one
man; he is as right as the Russian historians who maintain that Napoleon was
drawn to Moscow by the skill of the Russian commanders. Here besides the
law of retrospection, which regards all the past as a preparation for events that
subsequently occur, the law of reciprocity comes in, confusing the whole
matter. A good chessplayer having lost a game is sincerely convinced that his
loss resulted from a mistake he made and looks for that mistake in the
opening, but forgets that at each stage of the game there were similar mistakes
and that none of his moves were perfect. He only notices the mistake to which
he pays attention, because his opponent took advantage of it. How much more
complex than this is the game of war, which occurs under certain limits of
time, and where it is not one will that manipulates lifeless objects, but
everything results from innumerable conflicts of various wills!
After Smolensk Napoleon sought a battle beyond Dorogobuzh at Vyazma, and
then at Tsarevo-Zaymishche, but it happened that owing to a conjunction of
innumerable circumstances the Russians could not give battle till they reached
Borodino, seventy miles from Moscow. From Vyazma Napoleon ordered a
direct advance on Moscow.
Moscou, la capitale asiatique de ce grand empire, la ville sacree des peuples
d'Alexandre, Moscou avec ses innombrables eglises en forme de pagodes
chinoises, * this Moscow gave Napoleon's imagination no rest. On the march
from Vyazma to Tsarevo-Zaymishche he rode his light bay bobtailed ambler
accompanied by his Guards, his bodyguard, his pages, and aides-de-camp.
Berthier, his chief of staff, dropped behind to question a Russian prisoner
captured by the cavalry. Followed by Lelorgne d'Ideville, an interpreter, he
overtook Napoleon at a gallop and reined in his horse with an amused
expression.
* "Moscow, the Asiatic capital of this great empire, the
sacred city of Alexander's people, Moscow with its
innumerable churches shaped like Chinese pagodas."
"Well?" asked Napoleon.
"One of Platov's Cossacks says that Platov's corps is joining up with the main
army and that Kutuzov has been appointed commander-in-chief. He is a very
shrewd and garrulous fellow."
Napoleon smiled and told them to give the Cossack a horse and bring the man
to him. He wished to talk to him himself. Several adjutants galloped off, and
an hour later, Lavrushka, the serf Denisov had handed over to Rostov, rode up
to Napoleon in an orderly's jacket and on a French cavalry saddle, with a
merry, and tipsy face. Napoleon told him to ride by his side and began
questioning him.
"You are a Cossack?"
"Yes, a Cossack, your Honor."
"The Cossack, not knowing in what company he was, for Napoleon's plain
appearance had nothing about it that would reveal to an Oriental mind the
presence of a monarch, talked with extreme familiarity of the incidents of the
war," says Thiers, narrating this episode. In reality Lavrushka, having got
drunk the day before and left his master dinnerless, had been whipped and sent
to the village in quest of chickens, where he engaged in looting till the French
took him prisoner. Lavrushka was one of those coarse, bare-faced lackeys who
have seen all sorts of things, consider it necessary to do everything in a mean
and cunning way, are ready to render any sort of service to their master, and
are keen at guessing their master's baser impulses, especially those prompted
by vanity and pettiness.
Finding himself in the company of Napoleon, whose identity he had easily and
surely recognized, Lavrushka was not in the least abashed but merely did his
utmost to gain his new master's favor.
He knew very well that this was Napoleon, but Napoleon's presence could no
more intimidate him than Rostov's, or a sergeant major's with the rods, would
have done, for he had nothing that either the sergeant major or Napoleon could
deprive him of.
So he rattled on, telling all the gossip he had heard among the orderlies. Much
of it true. But when Napoleon asked him whether the Russians thought they
would beat Bonaparte or not, Lavrushka screwed up his eyes and considered.
In this question he saw subtle cunning, as men of his type see cunning in
everything, so he frowned and did not answer immediately.
"It's like this," he said thoughtfully, "if there's a battle soon, yours will win.
That's right. But if three days pass, then after that, well, then that same battle
will not soon be over."
Lelorgne d'Ideville smilingly interpreted this speech to Napoleon thus: "If a
battle takes place within the next three days the French will win, but if later,
God knows what will happen." Napoleon did not smile, though he was
evidently in high good humor, and he ordered these words to be repeated.
Lavrushka noticed this and to entertain him further, pretending not to know
who Napoleon was, added:
"We know that you have Bonaparte and that he has beaten everybody in the
world, but we are a different matter..."—without knowing why or how this bit
of boastful patriotism slipped out at the end.
The interpreter translated these words without the last phrase, and Bonaparte
smiled. "The young Cossack made his mighty interlocutor smile," says Thiers.
After riding a few paces in silence, Napoleon turned to Berthier and said he
wished to see how the news that he was talking to the Emperor himself, to that
very Emperor who had written his immortally victorious name on the
Pyramids, would affect this enfant du Don. *
* "Child of the Don."
The fact was accordingly conveyed to Lavrushka.
Lavrushka, understanding that this was done to perplex him and that Napoleon
expected him to be frightened, to gratify his new masters promptly pretended
to be astonished and awe-struck, opened his eyes wide, and assumed the
expression he usually put on when taken to be whipped. "As soon as
Napoleon's interpreter had spoken," says Thiers, "the Cossack, seized by
amazement, did not utter another word, but rode on, his eyes fixed on the
conqueror whose fame had reached him across the steppes of the East. All his
loquacity was suddenly arrested and replaced by a naive and silent feeling of
admiration. Napoleon, after making the Cossack a present, had him set free
like a bird restored to its native fields."
Napoleon rode on, dreaming of the Moscow that so appealed to his
imagination, and "the bird restored to its native fields" galloped to our
outposts, inventing on the way all that had not taken place but that he meant to
relate to his comrades. What had really taken place he did not wish to relate
because it seemed to him not worth telling. He found the Cossacks, inquired
for the regiment operating with Platov's detachment and by evening found his
master, Nicholas Rostov, quartered at Yankovo. Rostov was just mounting to
go for a ride round the neighboring villages with Ilyin; he let Lavrushka have
another horse and took him along with him.
CHAPTER VIII
Princess Mary was not in Moscow and out of danger as Prince Andrew
supposed.
After the return of Alpatych from Smolensk the old prince suddenly seemed to
awake as from a dream. He ordered the militiamen to be called up from the
villages and armed, and wrote a letter to the commander-in-chief informing
him that he had resolved to remain at Bald Hills to the last extremity and to
defend it, leaving to the commander-in-chief's discretion to take measures or
not for the defense of Bald Hills, where one of Russia's oldest generals would
be captured or killed, and he announced to his household that he would remain
at Bald Hills.
But while himself remaining, he gave instructions for the departure of the
princess and Dessalles with the little prince to Bogucharovo and thence to
Moscow. Princess Mary, alarmed by her father's feverish and sleepless activity
after his previous apathy, could not bring herself to leave him alone and for the
first time in her life ventured to disobey him. She refused to go away and her
father's fury broke over her in a terrible storm. He repeated every injustice he
had ever inflicted on her. Trying to convict her, he told her she had worn him
out, had caused his quarrel with his son, had harbored nasty suspicions of him,
making it the object of her life to poison his existence, and he drove her from
his study telling her that if she did not go away it was all the same to him. He
declared that he did not wish to remember her existence and warned her not to
dare to let him see her. The fact that he did not, as she had feared, order her to
be carried away by force but only told her not to let him see her cheered
Princess Mary. She knew it was a proof that in the depth of his soul he was
glad she was remaining at home and had not gone away.
The morning after little Nicholas had left, the old prince donned his full
uniform and prepared to visit the commander-in-chief. His caleche was
already at the door. Princess Mary saw him walk out of the house in his
uniform wearing all his orders and go down the garden to review his armed
peasants and domestic serfs. She sat by the window listening to his voice
which reached her from the garden. Suddenly several men came running up
the avenue with frightened faces.
Princess Mary ran out to the porch, down the flower-bordered path, and into
the avenue. A large crowd of militiamen and domestics were moving toward
her, and in their midst several men were supporting by the armpits and
dragging along a little old man in a uniform and decorations. She ran up to
him and, in the play of the sunlight that fell in small round spots through the
shade of the lime-tree avenue, could not be sure what change there was in his
face. All she could see was that his former stern and determined expression
had altered to one of timidity and submission. On seeing his daughter he
moved his helpless lips and made a hoarse sound. It was impossible to make
out what he wanted. He was lifted up, carried to his study, and laid on the very
couch he had so feared of late.
The doctor, who was fetched that same night, bled him and said that the prince
had had a seizure paralyzing his right side.
It was becoming more and more dangerous to remain at Bald Hills, and next
day they moved the prince to Bogucharovo, the doctor accompanying him.
By the time they reached Bogucharovo, Dessalles and the little prince had
already left for Moscow.
For three weeks the old prince lay stricken by paralysis in the new house
Prince Andrew had built at Bogucharovo, ever in the same state, getting
neither better nor worse. He was unconscious and lay like a distorted corpse.
He muttered unceasingly, his eyebrows and lips twitching, and it was
impossible to tell whether he understood what was going on around him or
not. One thing was certain—that he was suffering and wished to say
something. But what it was, no one could tell: it might be some caprice of a
sick and half-crazy man, or it might relate to public affairs, or possibly to
family concerns.
The doctor said this restlessness did not mean anything and was due to
physical causes; but Princess Mary thought he wished to tell her something,
and the fact that her presence always increased his restlessness confirmed her
opinion.
He was evidently suffering both physically and mentally. There was no hope
of recovery. It was impossible for him to travel, it would not do to let him die
on the road. "Would it not be better if the end did come, the very end?"
Princess Mary sometimes thought. Night and day, hardly sleeping at all, she
watched him and, terrible to say, often watched him not with hope of finding
signs of improvement but wishing to find symptoms of the approach of the
end.
Strange as it was to her to acknowledge this feeling in herself, yet there it was.
And what seemed still more terrible to her was that since her father's illness
began (perhaps even sooner, when she stayed with him expecting something to
happen), all the personal desires and hopes that had been forgotten or sleeping
within her had awakened. Thoughts that had not entered her mind for years—
thoughts of a life free from the fear of her father, and even the possibility of
love and of family happiness—floated continually in her imagination like
temptations of the devil. Thrust them aside as she would, questions continually
recurred to her as to how she would order her life now, after that. These were
temptations of the devil and Princess Mary knew it. She knew that the sole
weapon against him was prayer, and she tried to pray. She assumed an attitude
of prayer, looked at the icons, repeated the words of a prayer, but she could not
pray. She felt that a different world had now taken possession of her—the life
of a world of strenuous and free activity, quite opposed to the spiritual world
in which till now she had been confined and in which her greatest comfort had
been prayer. She could not pray, could not weep, and worldly cares took
possession of her.
It was becoming dangerous to remain in Bogucharovo. News of the approach
of the French came from all sides, and in one village, ten miles from
Bogucharovo, a homestead had been looted by French marauders.
The doctor insisted on the necessity of moving the prince; the provincial
Marshal of the Nobility sent an official to Princess Mary to persuade her to get
away as quickly as possible, and the head of the rural police having come to
Bogucharovo urged the same thing, saying that the French were only some
twenty-five miles away, that French proclamations were circulating in the
villages, and that if the princess did not take her father away before the
fifteenth, he could not answer for the consequences.
The princess decided to leave on the fifteenth. The cares of preparation and
giving orders, for which everyone came to her, occupied her all day. She spent
the night of the fourteenth as usual, without undressing, in the room next to the
one where the prince lay. Several times, waking up, she heard his groans and
muttering, the creak of his bed, and the steps of Tikhon and the doctor when
they turned him over. Several times she listened at the door, and it seemed to
her that his mutterings were louder than usual and that they turned him over
oftener. She could not sleep and several times went to the door and listened,
wishing to enter but not deciding to do so. Though he did not speak, Princess
Mary saw and knew how unpleasant every sign of anxiety on his account was
to him. She had noticed with what dissatisfaction he turned from the look she
sometimes involuntarily fixed on him. She knew that her going in during the
night at an unusual hour would irritate him.
But never had she felt so grieved for him or so much afraid of losing him. She
recalled all her life with him and in every word and act of his found an
expression of his love of her. Occasionally amid these memories temptations
of the devil would surge into her imagination: thoughts of how things would
be after his death, and how her new, liberated life would be ordered. But she
drove these thoughts away with disgust. Toward morning he became quiet and
she fell asleep.
She woke late. That sincerity which often comes with waking showed her
clearly what chiefly concerned her about her father's illness. On waking she
listened to what was going on behind the door and, hearing him groan, said to
herself with a sigh that things were still the same.
"But what could have happened? What did I want? I want his death!" she cried
with a feeling of loathing for herself.
She washed, dressed, said her prayers, and went out to the porch. In front of it
stood carriages without horses and things were being packed into the vehicles.
It was a warm, gray morning. Princess Mary stopped at the porch, still
horrified by her spiritual baseness and trying to arrange her thoughts before
going to her father. The doctor came downstairs and went out to her.
"He is a little better today," said he. "I was looking for you. One can make out
something of what he is saying. His head is clearer. Come in, he is asking for
you..."
Princess Mary's heart beat so violently at this news that she grew pale and
leaned against the wall to keep from falling. To see him, talk to him, feel his
eyes on her now that her whole soul was overflowing with those dreadful,
wicked temptations, was a torment of joy and terror.
"Come," said the doctor.
Princess Mary entered her father's room and went up to his bed. He was lying
on his back propped up high, and his small bony hands with their knotted
purple veins were lying on the quilt; his left eye gazed straight before him, his
right eye was awry, and his brows and lips motionless. He seemed altogether
so thin, small, and pathetic. His face seemed to have shriveled or melted; his
features had grown smaller. Princess Mary went up and kissed his hand. His
left hand pressed hers so that she understood that he had long been waiting for
her to come. He twitched her hand, and his brows and lips quivered angrily.
She looked at him in dismay trying to guess what he wanted of her. When she
changed her position so that his left eye could see her face he calmed down,
not taking his eyes off her for some seconds. Then his lips and tongue moved,
sounds came, and he began to speak, gazing timidly and imploringly at her,
evidently afraid that she might not understand.
Straining all her faculties Princess Mary looked at him. The comic efforts with
which he moved his tongue made her drop her eyes and with difficulty repress
the sobs that rose to her throat. He said something, repeating the same words
several times. She could not understand them, but tried to guess what he was
saying and inquiringly repeated the words he uttered.
"Mmm...ar...ate...ate..." he repeated several times.
It was quite impossible to understand these sounds. The doctor thought he had
guessed them, and inquiringly repeated: "Mary, are you afraid?" The prince
shook his head, again repeated the same sounds.
"My mind, my mind aches?" questioned Princess Mary.
He made a mumbling sound in confirmation of this, took her hand, and began
pressing it to different parts of his breast as if trying to find the right place for
it.
"Always thoughts... about you... thoughts..." he then uttered much more
clearly than he had done before, now that he was sure of being understood.
Princess Mary pressed her head against his hand, trying to hide her sobs and
tears.
He moved his hand over her hair.
"I have been calling you all night..." he brought out.
"If only I had known..." she said through her tears. "I was afraid to come in."
He pressed her hand.
"Weren't you asleep?"
"No, I did not sleep," said Princess Mary, shaking her head.
Unconsciously imitating her father, she now tried to express herself as he did,
as much as possible by signs, and her tongue too seemed to move with
difficulty.
"Dear one... Dearest..." Princess Mary could not quite make out what he had
said, but from his look it was clear that he had uttered a tender caressing word
such as he had never used to her before. "Why didn't you come in?"
"And I was wishing for his death!" thought Princess Mary.
He was silent awhile.
"Thank you... daughter dear!... for all, for all... forgive!... thank you!...
forgive!... thank you!..." and tears began to flow from his eyes. "Call
Andrew!" he said suddenly, and a childish, timid expression of doubt showed
itself on his face as he spoke.
He himself seemed aware that his demand was meaningless. So at least it
seemed to Princess Mary.
"I have a letter from him," she replied.
He glanced at her with timid surprise.
"Where is he?"
"He's with the army, Father, at Smolensk."
He closed his eyes and remained silent a long time. Then as if in answer to his
doubts and to confirm the fact that now he understood and remembered
everything, he nodded his head and reopened his eyes.
"Yes," he said, softly and distinctly. "Russia has perished. They've destroyed
her."
And he began to sob, and again tears flowed from his eyes. Princess Mary
could no longer restrain herself and wept while she gazed at his face.
Again he closed his eyes. His sobs ceased, he pointed to his eyes, and Tikhon,
understanding him, wiped away the tears.
Then he again opened his eyes and said something none of them could
understand for a long time, till at last Tikhon understood and repeated it.
Princess Mary had sought the meaning of his words in the mood in which he
had just been speaking. She thought he was speaking of Russia, or Prince
Andrew, of herself, of his grandson, or of his own death, and so she could not
guess his words.
"Put on your white dress. I like it," was what he said.
Having understood this Princess Mary sobbed still louder, and the doctor
taking her arm led her out to the veranda, soothing her and trying to persuade
her to prepare for her journey. When she had left the room the prince again
began speaking about his son, about the war, and about the Emperor, angrily
twitching his brows and raising his hoarse voice, and then he had a second and
final stroke.
Princess Mary stayed on the veranda. The day had cleared, it was hot and
sunny. She could understand nothing, think of nothing and feel nothing, except
passionate love for her father, love such as she thought she had never felt till
that moment. She ran out sobbing into the garden and as far as the pond, along
the avenues of young lime trees Prince Andrew had planted.
"Yes... I... I... I wished for his death! Yes, I wanted it to end quicker.... I wished
to be at peace.... And what will become of me? What use will peace be when
he is no longer here?" Princess Mary murmured, pacing the garden with
hurried steps and pressing her hands to her bosom which heaved with
convulsive sobs.
When she had completed the tour of the garden, which brought her again to
the house, she saw Mademoiselle Bourienne—who had remained at
Bogucharovo and did not wish to leave it—coming toward her with a stranger.
This was the Marshal of the Nobility of the district, who had come personally
to point out to the princess the necessity for her prompt departure. Princess
Mary listened without understanding him; she led him to the house, offered
him lunch, and sat down with him. Then, excusing herself, she went to the
door of the old prince's room. The doctor came out with an agitated face and
said she could not enter.
"Go away, Princess! Go away... go away!"
She returned to the garden and sat down on the grass at the foot of the slope by
the pond, where no one could see her. She did not know how long she had
been there when she was aroused by the sound of a woman's footsteps running
along the path. She rose and saw Dunyasha her maid, who was evidently
looking for her, and who stopped suddenly as if in alarm on seeing her
mistress.
"Please come, Princess... The Prince," said Dunyasha in a breaking voice.
"Immediately, I'm coming, I'm coming!" replied the princess hurriedly, not
giving Dunyasha time to finish what she was saying, and trying to avoid
seeing the girl she ran toward the house.
"Princess, it's God's will! You must be prepared for everything," said the
Marshal, meeting her at the house door.
"Let me alone; it's not true!" she cried angrily to him.
The doctor tried to stop her. She pushed him aside and ran to her father's door.
"Why are these people with frightened faces stopping me? I don't want any of
them! And what are they doing here?" she thought. She opened the door and
the bright daylight in that previously darkened room startled her. In the room
were her nurse and other women. They all drew back from the bed, making
way for her. He was still lying on the bed as before, but the stern expression of
his quiet face made Princess Mary stop short on the threshold.
"No, he's not dead—it's impossible!" she told herself and approached him, and
repressing the terror that seized her, she pressed her lips to his cheek. But she
stepped back immediately. All the force of the tenderness she had been feeling
for him vanished instantly and was replaced by a feeling of horror at what lay
there before her. "No, he is no more! He is not, but here where he was is
something unfamiliar and hostile, some dreadful, terrifying, and repellent
mystery!" And hiding her face in her hands, Princess Mary sank into the arms
of the doctor, who held her up.
In the presence of Tikhon and the doctor the women washed what had been
the prince, tied his head up with a handkerchief that the mouth should not
stiffen while open, and with another handkerchief tied together the legs that
were already spreading apart. Then they dressed him in uniform with his
decorations and placed his shriveled little body on a table. Heaven only knows
who arranged all this and when, but it all got done as if of its own accord.
Toward night candles were burning round his coffin, a pall was spread over it,
the floor was strewn with sprays of juniper, a printed band was tucked in under
his shriveled head, and in a corner of the room sat a chanter reading the
psalms.
Just as horses shy and snort and gather about a dead horse, so the inmates of
the house and strangers crowded into the drawing room round the coffin—the
Marshal, the village Elder, peasant women—and all with fixed and frightened
eyes, crossing themselves, bowed and kissed the old prince's cold and
stiffened hand.
CHAPTER IX
Until Prince Andrew settled in Bogucharovo its owners had always been
absentees, and its peasants were of quite a different character from those of
Bald Hills. They differed from them in speech, dress, and disposition. They
were called steppe peasants. The old prince used to approve of them for their
endurance at work when they came to Bald Hills to help with the harvest or to
dig ponds, and ditches, but he disliked them for their boorishness.
Prince Andrew's last stay at Bogucharovo, when he introduced hospitals and
schools and reduced the quitrent the peasants had to pay, had not softened their
disposition but had on the contrary strengthened in them the traits of character
the old prince called boorishness. Various obscure rumors were always current
among them: at one time a rumor that they would all be enrolled as Cossacks;
at another of a new religion to which they were all to be converted; then of
some proclamation of the Tsar's and of an oath to the Tsar Paul in 1797 (in
connection with which it was rumored that freedom had been granted them but
the landowners had stopped it), then of Peter Fedorovich's return to the throne
in seven years' time, when everything would be made free and so "simple" that
there would be no restrictions. Rumors of the war with Bonaparte and his
invasion were connected in their minds with the same sort of vague notions of
Antichrist, the end of the world, and "pure freedom."
In the vicinity of Bogucharovo were large villages belonging to the crown or
to owners whose serfs paid quitrent and could work where they pleased. There
were very few resident landlords in the neighborhood and also very few
domestic or literate serfs, and in the lives of the peasantry of those parts the
mysterious undercurrents in the life of the Russian people, the causes and
meaning of which are so baffling to contemporaries, were more clearly and
strongly noticeable than among others. One instance, which had occurred
some twenty years before, was a movement among the peasants to emigrate to
some unknown "warm rivers." Hundreds of peasants, among them the
Bogucharovo folk, suddenly began selling their cattle and moving in whole
families toward the southeast. As birds migrate to somewhere beyond the sea,
so these men with their wives and children streamed to the southeast, to parts
where none of them had ever been. They set off in caravans, bought their
freedom one by one or ran away, and drove or walked toward the "warm
rivers." Many of them were punished, some sent to Siberia, many died of cold
and hunger on the road, many returned of their own accord, and the movement
died down of itself just as it had sprung up, without apparent reason. But such
undercurrents still existed among the people and gathered new forces ready to
manifest themselves just as strangely, unexpectedly, and at the same time
simply, naturally, and forcibly. Now in 1812, to anyone living in close touch
with these people it was apparent that these undercurrents were acting strongly
and nearing an eruption.
Alpatych, who had reached Bogucharovo shortly before the old prince's death,
noticed an agitation among the peasants, and that contrary to what was
happening in the Bald Hills district, where over a radius of forty miles all the
peasants were moving away and leaving their villages to be devastated by the
Cossacks, the peasants in the steppe region round Bogucharovo were, it was
rumored, in touch with the French, received leaflets from them that passed
from hand to hand, and did not migrate. He learned from domestic serfs loyal
to him that the peasant Karp, who possessed great influence in the village
commune and had recently been away driving a government transport, had
returned with news that the Cossacks were destroying deserted villages, but
that the French did not harm them. Alpatych also knew that on the previous
day another peasant had even brought from the village of Visloukhovo, which
was occupied by the French, a proclamation by a French general that no harm
would be done to the inhabitants, and if they remained they would be paid for
anything taken from them. As proof of this the peasant had brought from
Visloukhovo a hundred rubles in notes (he did not know that they were false)
paid to him in advance for hay.
More important still, Alpatych learned that on the morning of the very day he
gave the village Elder orders to collect carts to move the princess' luggage
from Bogucharovo, there had been a village meeting at which it had been
decided not to move but to wait. Yet there was no time to waste. On the
fifteenth, the day of the old prince's death, the Marshal had insisted on
Princess Mary's leaving at once, as it was becoming dangerous. He had told
her that after the sixteenth he could not be responsible for what might happen.
On the evening of the day the old prince died the Marshal went away,
promising to return next day for the funeral. But this he was unable to do, for
he received tidings that the French had unexpectedly advanced, and had barely
time to remove his own family and valuables from his estate.
For some thirty years Bogucharovo had been managed by the village Elder,
Dron, whom the old prince called by the diminutive "Dronushka."
Dron was one of those physically and mentally vigorous peasants who grow
big beards as soon as they are of age and go on unchanged till they are sixty or
seventy, without a gray hair or the loss of a tooth, as straight and strong at
sixty as at thirty.
Soon after the migration to the "warm rivers," in which he had taken part like
the rest, Dron was made village Elder and overseer of Bogucharovo, and had
since filled that post irreproachably for twenty-three years. The peasants
feared him more than they did their master. The masters, both the old prince
and the young, and the steward respected him and jestingly called him "the
Minister." During the whole time of his service Dron had never been drunk or
ill, never after sleepless nights or the hardest tasks had he shown the least
fatigue, and though he could not read he had never forgotten a single money
account or the number of quarters of flour in any of the endless cartloads he
sold for the prince, nor a single shock of the whole corn crop on any single
acre of the Bogucharovo fields.
Alpatych, arriving from the devastated Bald Hills estate, sent for his Dron on
the day of the prince's funeral and told him to have twelve horses got ready for
the princess' carriages and eighteen carts for the things to be removed from
Bogucharovo. Though the peasants paid quitrent, Alpatych thought no
difficulty would be made about complying with this order, for there were two
hundred and thirty households at work in Bogucharovo and the peasants were
well to do. But on hearing the order Dron lowered his eyes and remained
silent. Alpatych named certain peasants he knew, from whom he told him to
take the carts.
Dron replied that the horses of these peasants were away carting. Alpatych
named others, but they too, according to Dron, had no horses available: some
horses were carting for the government, others were too weak, and others had
died for want of fodder. It seemed that no horses could be had even for the
carriages, much less for the carting.
Alpatych looked intently at Dron and frowned. Just as Dron was a model
village Elder, so Alpatych had not managed the prince's estates for twenty
years in vain. He was a model steward, possessing in the highest degree the
faculty of divining the needs and instincts of those he dealt with. Having
glanced at Dron he at once understood that his answers did not express his
personal views but the general mood of the Bogucharovo commune, by which
the Elder had already been carried away. But he also knew that Dron, who had
acquired property and was hated by the commune, must be hesitating between
the two camps: the masters' and the serfs'. He noticed this hesitation in Dron's
look and therefore frowned and moved closer up to him.
"Now just listen, Dronushka," said he. "Don't talk nonsense to me. His
excellency Prince Andrew himself gave me orders to move all the people
away and not leave them with the enemy, and there is an order from the Tsar
about it too. Anyone who stays is a traitor to the Tsar. Do you hear?"
"I hear," Dron answered without lifting his eyes.
Alpatych was not satisfied with this reply.
"Eh, Dron, it will turn out badly!" he said, shaking his head.
"The power is in your hands," Dron rejoined sadly.
"Eh, Dron, drop it!" Alpatych repeated, withdrawing his hand from his bosom
and solemnly pointing to the floor at Dron's feet. "I can see through you and
three yards into the ground under you," he continued, gazing at the floor in
front of Dron.
Dron was disconcerted, glanced furtively at Alpatych and again lowered his
eyes.
"You drop this nonsense and tell the people to get ready to leave their homes
and go to Moscow and to get carts ready for tomorrow morning for the
princess' things. And don't go to any meeting yourself, do you hear?"
Dron suddenly fell on his knees.
"Yakov Alpatych, discharge me! Take the keys from me and discharge me, for
Christ's sake!"
"Stop that!" cried Alpatych sternly. "I see through you and three yards under
you," he repeated, knowing that his skill in beekeeping, his knowledge of the
right time to sow the oats, and the fact that he had been able to retain the old
prince's favor for twenty years had long since gained him the reputation of
being a wizard, and that the power of seeing three yards under a man is
considered an attribute of wizards.
Dron got up and was about to say something, but Alpatych interrupted him.
"What is it you have got into your heads, eh?... What are you thinking of, eh?"
"What am I to do with the people?" said Dron. "They're quite beside
themselves; I have already told them..."
"'Told them,' I dare say!" said Alpatych. "Are they drinking?" he asked
abruptly.
"Quite beside themselves, Yakov Alpatych; they've fetched another barrel."
"Well, then, listen! I'll go to the police officer, and you tell them so, and that
they must stop this and the carts must be got ready."
"I understand."
Alpatych did not insist further. He had managed people for a long time and
knew that the chief way to make them obey is to show no suspicion that they
can possibly disobey. Having wrung a submissive "I understand" from Dron,
Alpatych contented himself with that, though he not only doubted but felt
almost certain that without the help of troops the carts would not be
forthcoming.
And so it was, for when evening came no carts had been provided. In the
village, outside the drink shop, another meeting was being held, which decided
that the horses should be driven out into the woods and the carts should not be
provided. Without saying anything of this to the princess, Alpatych had his
own belongings taken out of the carts which had arrived from Bald Hills and
had those horses got ready for the princess' carriages. Meanwhile he went
himself to the police authorities.
CHAPTER X
After her father's funeral Princess Mary shut herself up in her room and did
not admit anyone. A maid came to the door to say that Alpatych was asking
for orders about their departure. (This was before his talk with Dron.) Princess
Mary raised herself on the sofa on which she had been lying and replied
through the closed door that she did not mean to go away and begged to be left
in peace.
The windows of the room in which she was lying looked westward. She lay on
the sofa with her face to the wall, fingering the buttons of the leather cushion
and seeing nothing but that cushion, and her confused thoughts were centered
on one subject—the irrevocability of death and her own spiritual baseness,
which she had not suspected, but which had shown itself during her father's
illness. She wished to pray but did not dare to, dared not in her present state of
mind address herself to God. She lay for a long time in that position.
The sun had reached the other side of the house, and its slanting rays shone
into the open window, lighting up the room and part of the morocco cushion at
which Princess Mary was looking. The flow of her thoughts suddenly stopped.
Unconsciously she sat up, smoothed her hair, got up, and went to the window,
involuntarily inhaling the freshness of the clear but windy evening.
"Yes, you can well enjoy the evening now! He is gone and no one will hinder
you," she said to herself, and sinking into a chair she let her head fall on the
window sill.
Someone spoke her name in a soft and tender voice from the garden and
kissed her head. She looked up. It was Mademoiselle Bourienne in a black
dress and weepers. She softly approached Princess Mary, sighed, kissed her,
and immediately began to cry. The princess looked up at her. All their former
disharmony and her own jealousy recurred to her mind. But she remembered
too how he had changed of late toward Mademoiselle Bourienne and could not
bear to see her, thereby showing how unjust were the reproaches Princess
Mary had mentally addressed to her. "Besides, is it for me, for me who desired
his death, to condemn anyone?" she thought.
Princess Mary vividly pictured to herself the position of Mademoiselle
Bourienne, whom she had of late kept at a distance, but who yet was
dependent on her and living in her house. She felt sorry for her and held out
her hand with a glance of gentle inquiry. Mademoiselle Bourienne at once
began crying again and kissed that hand, speaking of the princess' sorrow and
making herself a partner in it. She said her only consolation was the fact that
the princess allowed her to share her sorrow, that all the old misunderstandings
should sink into nothing but this great grief; that she felt herself blameless in
regard to everyone, and that he, from above, saw her affection and gratitude.
The princess heard her, not heeding her words but occasionally looking up at
her and listening to the sound of her voice.
"Your position is doubly terrible, dear princess," said Mademoiselle Bourienne
after a pause. "I understand that you could not, and cannot, think of yourself,
but with my love for you I must do so.... Has Alpatych been to you? Has he
spoken to you of going away?" she asked.
Princess Mary did not answer. She did not understand who was to go or where
to. "Is it possible to plan or think of anything now? Is it not all the same?" she
thought, and did not reply.
"You know, chere Marie," said Mademoiselle Bourienne, "that we are in
danger—are surrounded by the French. It would be dangerous to move now. If
we go we are almost sure to be taken prisoners, and God knows..."
Princess Mary looked at her companion without understanding what she was
talking about.
"Oh, if anyone knew how little anything matters to me now," she said. "Of
course I would on no account wish to go away from him.... Alpatych did say
something about going.... Speak to him; I can do nothing, nothing, and don't
want to...."
"I've spoken to him. He hopes we should be in time to get away tomorrow, but
I think it would now be better to stay here," said Mademoiselle Bourienne.
"Because, you will agree, chere Marie, to fall into the hands of the soldiers or
of riotous peasants would be terrible."
Mademoiselle Bourienne took from her reticule a proclamation (not printed on
ordinary Russian paper) of General Rameau's, telling people not to leave their
homes and that the French authorities would afford them proper protection.
She handed this to the princess.
"I think it would be best to appeal to that general," she continued, "and I am
sure that all due respect would be shown you."
Princess Mary read the paper, and her face began to quiver with stifled sobs.
"From whom did you get this?" she asked.
"They probably recognized that I am French, by my name," replied
Mademoiselle Bourienne blushing.
Princess Mary, with the paper in her hand, rose from the window and with a
pale face went out of the room and into what had been Prince Andrew's study.
"Dunyasha, send Alpatych, or Dronushka, or somebody to me!" she said, "and
tell Mademoiselle Bourienne not to come to me," she added, hearing
Mademoiselle Bourienne's voice. "We must go at once, at once!" she said,
appalled at the thought of being left in the hands of the French.
"If Prince Andrew heard that I was in the power of the French! That I, the
daughter of Prince Nicholas Bolkonski, asked General Rameau for protection
and accepted his favor!" This idea horrified her, made her shudder, blush, and
feel such a rush of anger and pride as she had never experienced before. All
that was distressing, and especially all that was humiliating, in her position
rose vividly to her mind. "They, the French, would settle in this house: M. le
General Rameau would occupy Prince Andrew's study and amuse himself by
looking through and reading his letters and papers. Mademoiselle Bourienne
would do the honors of Bogucharovo for him. I should be given a small room
as a favor, the soldiers would violate my father's newly dug grave to steal his
crosses and stars, they would tell me of their victories over the Russians, and
would pretend to sympathize with my sorrow..." thought Princess Mary, not
thinking her own thoughts but feeling bound to think like her father and her
brother. For herself she did not care where she remained or what happened to
her, but she felt herself the representative of her dead father and of Prince
Andrew. Involuntarily she thought their thoughts and felt their feelings. What
they would have said and what they would have done she felt bound to say
and do. She went into Prince Andrew's study, trying to enter completely into
his ideas, and considered her position.
The demands of life, which had seemed to her annihilated by her father's
death, all at once rose before her with a new, previously unknown force and
took possession of her.
Agitated and flushed she paced the room, sending now for Michael Ivanovich
and now for Tikhon or Dron. Dunyasha, the nurse, and the other maids could
not say in how far Mademoiselle Bourienne's statement was correct. Alpatych
was not at home, he had gone to the police. Neither could the architect
Michael Ivanovich, who on being sent for came in with sleepy eyes, tell
Princess Mary anything. With just the same smile of agreement with which for
fifteen years he had been accustomed to answer the old prince without
expressing views of his own, he now replied to Princess Mary, so that nothing
definite could be got from his answers. The old valet Tikhon, with sunken,
emaciated face that bore the stamp of inconsolable grief, replied: "Yes,
Princess" to all Princess Mary's questions and hardly refrained from sobbing
as he looked at her.
At length Dron, the village Elder, entered the room and with a deep bow to
Princess Mary came to a halt by the doorpost.
Princess Mary walked up and down the room and stopped in front of him.
"Dronushka," she said, regarding as a sure friend this Dronushka who always
used to bring a special kind of gingerbread from his visit to the fair at Vyazma
every year and smilingly offer it to her, "Dronushka, now since our
misfortune..." she began, but could not go on.
"We are all in God's hands," said he, with a sigh.
They were silent for a while.
"Dronushka, Alpatych has gone off somewhere and I have no one to turn to. Is
it true, as they tell me, that I can't even go away?"
"Why shouldn't you go away, your excellency? You can go," said Dron.
"I was told it would be dangerous because of the enemy. Dear friend, I can do
nothing. I understand nothing. I have nobody! I want to go away tonight or
early tomorrow morning."
Dron paused. He looked askance at Princess Mary and said: "There are no
horses; I told Yakov Alpatych so."
"Why are there none?" asked the princess.
"It's all God's scourge," said Dron. "What horses we had have been taken for
the army or have died—this is such a year! It's not a case of feeding horses—
we may die of hunger ourselves! As it is, some go three days without eating.
We've nothing, we've been ruined."
Princess Mary listened attentively to what he told her.
"The peasants are ruined? They have no bread?" she asked.
"They're dying of hunger," said Dron. "It's not a case of carting."
"But why didn't you tell me, Dronushka? Isn't it possible to help them? I'll do
all I can...."
To Princess Mary it was strange that now, at a moment when such sorrow was
filling her soul, there could be rich people and poor, and the rich could refrain
from helping the poor. She had heard vaguely that there was such a thing as
"landlord's corn" which was sometimes given to the peasants. She also knew
that neither her father nor her brother would refuse to help the peasants in
need, she only feared to make some mistake in speaking about the distribution
of the grain she wished to give. She was glad such cares presented themselves,
enabling her without scruple to forget her own grief. She began asking Dron
about the peasants' needs and what there was in Bogucharovo that belonged to
the landlord.
"But we have grain belonging to my brother?" she said.
"The landlord's grain is all safe," replied Dron proudly. "Our prince did not
order it to be sold."
"Give it to the peasants, let them have all they need; I give you leave in my
brother's name," said she.
Dron made no answer but sighed deeply.
"Give them that corn if there is enough of it. Distribute it all. I give this order
in my brother's name; and tell them that what is ours is theirs. We do not
grudge them anything. Tell them so."
Dron looked intently at the princess while she was speaking.
"Discharge me, little mother, for God's sake! Order the keys to be taken from
me," said he. "I have served twenty-three years and have done no wrong.
Discharge me, for God's sake!"
Princess Mary did not understand what he wanted of her or why he was asking
to be discharged. She replied that she had never doubted his devotion and that
she was ready to do anything for him and for the peasants.
CHAPTER XI
An hour later Dunyasha came to tell the princess that Dron had come, and all
the peasants had assembled at the barn by the princess' order and wished to
have word with their mistress.
"But I never told them to come," said Princess Mary. "I only told Dron to let
them have the grain."
"Only, for God's sake, Princess dear, have them sent away and don't go out to
them. It's all a trick," said Dunyasha, "and when Yakov Alpatych returns let us
get away... and please don't..."
"What is a trick?" asked Princess Mary in surprise.
"I know it is, only listen to me for God's sake! Ask nurse too. They say they
don't agree to leave Bogucharovo as you ordered."
"You're making some mistake. I never ordered them to go away," said Princess
Mary. "Call Dronushka."
Dron came and confirmed Dunyasha's words; the peasants had come by the
princess' order.
"But I never sent for them," declared the princess. "You must have given my
message wrong. I only said that you were to give them the grain."
Dron only sighed in reply.
"If you order it they will go away," said he.
"No, no. I'll go out to them," said Princess Mary, and in spite of the nurse's and
Dunyasha's protests she went out into the porch; Dron, Dunyasha, the nurse,
and Michael Ivanovich following her.
"They probably think I am offering them the grain to bribe them to remain
here, while I myself go away leaving them to the mercy of the French,"
thought Princess Mary. "I will offer them monthly rations and housing at our
Moscow estate. I am sure Andrew would do even more in my place," she
thought as she went out in the twilight toward the crowd standing on the
pasture by the barn.
The men crowded closer together, stirred, and rapidly took off their hats.
Princess Mary lowered her eyes and, tripping over her skirt, came close up to
them. So many different eyes, old and young, were fixed on her, and there
were so many different faces, that she could not distinguish any of them and,
feeling that she must speak to them all at once, did not know how to do it. But
again the sense that she represented her father and her brother gave her
courage, and she boldly began her speech.
"I am very glad you have come," she said without raising her eyes, and feeling
her heart beating quickly and violently. "Dronushka tells me that the war has
ruined you. That is our common misfortune, and I shall grudge nothing to help
you. I am myself going away because it is dangerous here... the enemy is
near... because... I am giving you everything, my friends, and I beg you to take
everything, all our grain, so that you may not suffer want! And if you have
been told that I am giving you the grain to keep you here—that is not true. On
the contrary, I ask you to go with all your belongings to our estate near
Moscow, and I promise you I will see to it that there you shall want for
nothing. You shall be given food and lodging."
The princess stopped. Sighs were the only sound heard in the crowd.
"I am not doing this on my own account," she continued, "I do it in the name
of my dead father, who was a good master to you, and of my brother and his
son."
Again she paused. No one broke the silence.
"Ours is a common misfortune and we will share it together. All that is mine is
yours," she concluded, scanning the faces before her.
All eyes were gazing at her with one and the same expression. She could not
fathom whether it was curiosity, devotion, gratitude, or apprehension and
distrust—but the expression on all the faces was identical.
"We are all very thankful for your bounty, but it won't do for us to take the
landlord's grain," said a voice at the back of the crowd.
"But why not?" asked the princess.
No one replied and Princess Mary, looking round at the crowd, found that
every eye she met now was immediately dropped.
"But why don't you want to take it?" she asked again.
No one answered.
The silence began to oppress the princess and she tried to catch someone's eye.
"Why don't you speak?" she inquired of a very old man who stood just in front
of her leaning on his stick. "If you think something more is wanted, tell me! I
will do anything," said she, catching his eye.
But as if this angered him, he bent his head quite low and muttered:
"Why should we agree? We don't want the grain."
"Why should we give up everything? We don't agree. Don't agree.... We are
sorry for you, but we're not willing. Go away yourself, alone..." came from
various sides of the crowd.
And again all the faces in that crowd bore an identical expression, though now
it was certainly not an expression of curiosity or gratitude, but of angry
resolve.
"But you can't have understood me," said Princess Mary with a sad smile.
"Why don't you want to go? I promise to house and feed you, while here the
enemy would ruin you..."
But her voice was drowned by the voices of the crowd.
"We're not willing. Let them ruin us! We won't take your grain. We don't
agree."
Again Princess Mary tried to catch someone's eye, but not a single eye in the
crowd was turned to her; evidently they were all trying to avoid her look. She
felt strange and awkward.
"Oh yes, an artful tale! Follow her into slavery! Pull down your houses and go
into bondage! I dare say! 'I'll give you grain, indeed!' she says," voices in the
crowd were heard saying.
With drooping head Princess Mary left the crowd and went back to the house.
Having repeated her order to Dron to have horses ready for her departure next
morning, she went to her room and remained alone with her own thoughts.
CHAPTER XII
For a long time that night Princess Mary sat by the open window of her room
hearing the sound of the peasants' voices that reached her from the village, but
it was not of them she was thinking. She felt that she could not understand
them however much she might think about them. She thought only of one
thing, her sorrow, which, after the break caused by cares for the present,
seemed already to belong to the past. Now she could remember it and weep or
pray.
After sunset the wind had dropped. The night was calm and fresh. Toward
midnight the voices began to subside, a cock crowed, the full moon began to
show from behind the lime trees, a fresh white dewy mist began to rise, and
stillness reigned over the village and the house.
Pictures of the near past—her father's illness and last moments—rose one after
another to her memory. With mournful pleasure she now lingered over these
images, repelling with horror only the last one, the picture of his death, which
she felt she could not contemplate even in imagination at this still and mystic
hour of night. And these pictures presented themselves to her so clearly and in
such detail that they seemed now present, now past, and now future.
She vividly recalled the moment when he had his first stroke and was being
dragged along by his armpits through the garden at Bald Hills, muttering
something with his helpless tongue, twitching his gray eyebrows and looking
uneasily and timidly at her.
"Even then he wanted to tell me what he told me the day he died," she thought.
"He had always thought what he said then." And she recalled in all its detail
the night at Bald Hills before he had the last stroke, when with a foreboding of
disaster she had remained at home against his will. She had not slept and had
stolen downstairs on tiptoe, and going to the door of the conservatory where
he slept that night had listened at the door. In a suffering and weary voice he
was saying something to Tikhon, speaking of the Crimea and its warm nights
and of the Empress. Evidently he had wanted to talk. "And why didn't he call
me? Why didn't he let me be there instead of Tikhon?" Princess Mary had
thought and thought again now. "Now he will never tell anyone what he had in
his soul. Never will that moment return for him or for me when he might have
said all he longed to say, and not Tikhon but I might have heard and
understood him. Why didn't I enter the room?" she thought. "Perhaps he would
then have said to me what he said the day he died. While talking to Tikhon he
asked about me twice. He wanted to see me, and I was standing close by,
outside the door. It was sad and painful for him to talk to Tikhon who did not
understand him. I remember how he began speaking to him about Lise as if
she were alive—he had forgotten she was dead—and Tikhon reminded him
that she was no more, and he shouted, 'Fool!' He was greatly depressed. From
behind the door I heard how he lay down on his bed groaning and loudly
exclaimed, 'My God!' Why didn't I go in then? What could he have done to
me? What could I have lost? And perhaps he would then have been comforted
and would have said that word to me." And Princess Mary uttered aloud the
caressing word he had said to her on the day of his death. "Dear-est!" she
repeated, and began sobbing, with tears that relieved her soul. She now saw
his face before her. And not the face she had known ever since she could
remember and had always seen at a distance, but the timid, feeble face she had
seen for the first time quite closely, with all its wrinkles and details, when she
stooped near to his mouth to catch what he said.
"Dear-est!" she repeated again.
"What was he thinking when he uttered that word? What is he thinking now?"
This question suddenly presented itself to her, and in answer she saw him
before her with the expression that was on his face as he lay in his coffin with
his chin bound up with a white handkerchief. And the horror that had seized
her when she touched him and convinced herself that that was not he, but
something mysterious and horrible, seized her again. She tried to think of
something else and to pray, but could do neither. With wide-open eyes she
gazed at the moonlight and the shadows, expecting every moment to see his
dead face, and she felt that the silence brooding over the house and within it
held her fast.
"Dunyasha," she whispered. "Dunyasha!" she screamed wildly, and tearing
herself out of this silence she ran to the servants' quarters to meet her old nurse
and the maidservants who came running toward her.
CHAPTER XIII
On the seventeenth of August Rostov and Ilyin, accompanied by Lavrushka
who had just returned from captivity and by an hussar orderly, left their
quarters at Yankovo, ten miles from Bogucharovo, and went for a ride—to try
a new horse Ilyin had bought and to find out whether there was any hay to be
had in the villages.
For the last three days Bogucharovo had lain between the two hostile armies,
so that it was as easy for the Russian rearguard to get to it as for the French
vanguard; Rostov, as a careful squadron commander, wished to take such
provisions as remained at Bogucharovo before the French could get them.
Rostov and Ilyin were in the merriest of moods. On the way to Bogucharovo, a
princely estate with a dwelling house and farm where they hoped to find many
domestic serfs and pretty girls, they questioned Lavrushka about Napoleon
and laughed at his stories, and raced one another to try Ilyin's horse.
Rostov had no idea that the village he was entering was the property of that
very Bolkonski who had been engaged to his sister.
Rostov and Ilyin gave rein to their horses for a last race along the incline
before reaching Bogucharovo, and Rostov, outstripping Ilyin, was the first to
gallop into the village street.
"You're first!" cried Ilyin, flushed.
"Yes, always first both on the grassland and here," answered Rostov, stroking
his heated Donets horse.
"And I'd have won on my Frenchy, your excellency," said Lavrushka from
behind, alluding to his shabby cart horse, "only I didn't wish to mortify you."
They rode at a footpace to the barn, where a large crowd of peasants was
standing.
Some of the men bared their heads, others stared at the new arrivals without
doffing their caps. Two tall old peasants with wrinkled faces and scanty beards
emerged from the tavern, smiling, staggering, and singing some incoherent
song, and approached the officers.
"Fine fellows!" said Rostov laughing. "Is there any hay here?"
"And how like one another," said Ilyin.
"A mo-o-st me-r-r-y co-o-m-pa...!" sang one of the peasants with a blissful
smile.
One of the men came out of the crowd and went up to Rostov.
"Who do you belong to?" he asked.
"The French," replied Ilyin jestingly, "and here is Napoleon himself"—and he
pointed to Lavrushka.
"Then you are Russians?" the peasant asked again.
"And is there a large force of you here?" said another, a short man, coming up.
"Very large," answered Rostov. "But why have you collected here?" he added.
"Is it a holiday?"
"The old men have met to talk over the business of the commune," replied the
peasant, moving away.
At that moment, on the road leading from the big house, two women and a
man in a white hat were seen coming toward the officers.
"The one in pink is mine, so keep off!" said Ilyin on seeing Dunyasha running
resolutely toward him.
"She'll be ours!" said Lavrushka to Ilyin, winking.
"What do you want, my pretty?" said Ilyin with a smile.
"The princess ordered me to ask your regiment and your name."
"This is Count Rostov, squadron commander, and I am your humble servant."
"Co-o-om-pa-ny!" roared the tipsy peasant with a beatific smile as he looked
at Ilyin talking to the girl. Following Dunyasha, Alpatych advanced to Rostov,
having bared his head while still at a distance.
"May I make bold to trouble your honor?" said he respectfully, but with a
shade of contempt for the youthfulness of this officer and with a hand thrust
into his bosom. "My mistress, daughter of General in Chief Prince Nicholas
Bolkonski who died on the fifteenth of this month, finding herself in
difficulties owing to the boorishness of these people"—he pointed to the
peasants—"asks you to come up to the house.... Won't you, please, ride on a
little farther," said Alpatych with a melancholy smile, "as it is not convenient
in the presence of...?" He pointed to the two peasants who kept as close to him
as horseflies to a horse.
"Ah!... Alpatych... Ah, Yakov Alpatych... Grand! Forgive us for Christ's sake,
eh?" said the peasants, smiling joyfully at him.
Rostov looked at the tipsy peasants and smiled.
"Or perhaps they amuse your honor?" remarked Alpatych with a staid air, as
he pointed at the old men with his free hand.
"No, there's not much to be amused at here," said Rostov, and rode on a little
way. "What's the matter?" he asked.
"I make bold to inform your honor that the rude peasants here don't wish to let
the mistress leave the estate, and threaten to unharness her horses, so that
though everything has been packed up since morning, her excellency cannot
get away."
"Impossible!" exclaimed Rostov.
"I have the honor to report to you the actual truth," said Alpatych.
Rostov dismounted, gave his horse to the orderly, and followed Alpatych to
the house, questioning him as to the state of affairs. It appeared that the
princess' offer of corn to the peasants the previous day, and her talk with Dron
and at the meeting, had actually had so bad an effect that Dron had finally
given up the keys and joined the peasants and had not appeared when
Alpatych sent for him; and that in the morning when the princess gave orders
to harness for her journey, the peasants had come in a large crowd to the barn
and sent word that they would not let her leave the village: that there was an
order not to move, and that they would unharness the horses. Alpatych had
gone out to admonish them, but was told (it was chiefly Karp who did the
talking, Dron not showing himself in the crowd) that they could not let the
princess go, that there was an order to the contrary, but that if she stayed they
would serve her as before and obey her in everything.
At the moment when Rostov and Ilyin were galloping along the road, Princess
Mary, despite the dissuasions of Alpatych, her nurse, and the maids, had given
orders to harness and intended to start, but when the cavalrymen were espied
they were taken for Frenchmen, the coachman ran away, and the women in the
house began to wail.
"Father! Benefactor! God has sent you!" exclaimed deeply moved voices as
Rostov passed through the anteroom.
Princess Mary was sitting helpless and bewildered in the large sitting room,
when Rostov was shown in. She could not grasp who he was and why he had
come, or what was happening to her. When she saw his Russian face, and by
his walk and the first words he uttered recognized him as a man of her own
class, she glanced at him with her deep radiant look and began speaking in a
voice that faltered and trembled with emotion. This meeting immediately
struck Rostov as a romantic event. "A helpless girl overwhelmed with grief,
left to the mercy of coarse, rioting peasants! And what a strange fate sent me
here! What gentleness and nobility there are in her features and expression!"
thought he as he looked at her and listened to her timid story.
When she began to tell him that all this had happened the day after her father's
funeral, her voice trembled. She turned away, and then, as if fearing he might
take her words as meant to move him to pity, looked at him with an
apprehensive glance of inquiry. There were tears in Rostov's eyes. Princess
Mary noticed this and glanced gratefully at him with that radiant look which
caused the plainness of her face to be forgotten.
"I cannot express, Princess, how glad I am that I happened to ride here and am
able to show my readiness to serve you," said Rostov, rising. "Go when you
please, and I give you my word of honor that no one shall dare to cause you
annoyance if only you will allow me to act as your escort." And bowing
respectfully, as if to a lady of royal blood, he moved toward the door.
Rostov's deferential tone seemed to indicate that though he would consider
himself happy to be acquainted with her, he did not wish to take advantage of
her misfortunes to intrude upon her.
Princess Mary understood this and appreciated his delicacy.
"I am very, very grateful to you," she said in French, "but I hope it was all a
misunderstanding and that no one is to blame for it." She suddenly began to
cry.
"Excuse me!" she said.
Rostov, knitting his brows, left the room with another low bow.
CHAPTER XIV
"Well, is she pretty? Ah, friend—my pink one is delicious; her name is
Dunyasha...."
But on glancing at Rostov's face Ilyin stopped short. He saw that his hero and
commander was following quite a different train of thought.
Rostov glanced angrily at Ilyin and without replying strode off with rapid
steps to the village.
"I'll show them; I'll give it to them, the brigands!" said he to himself.
Alpatych at a gliding trot, only just managing not to run, kept up with him
with difficulty.
"What decision have you been pleased to come to?" said he.
Rostov stopped and, clenching his fists, suddenly and sternly turned on
Alpatych.
"Decision? What decision? Old dotard!..." cried he. "What have you been
about? Eh? The peasants are rioting, and you can't manage them? You're a
traitor yourself! I know you. I'll flay you all alive!..." And as if afraid of
wasting his store of anger, he left Alpatych and went rapidly forward.
Alpatych, mastering his offended feelings, kept pace with Rostov at a gliding
gait and continued to impart his views. He said the peasants were obdurate and
that at the present moment it would be imprudent to "overresist" them without
an armed force, and would it not be better first to send for the military?
"I'll give them armed force... I'll 'overresist' them!" uttered Rostov
meaninglessly, breathless with irrational animal fury and the need to vent it.
Without considering what he would do he moved unconciously with quick,
resolute steps toward the crowd. And the nearer he drew to it the more
Alpatych felt that this unreasonable action might produce good results. The
peasants in the crowd were similarly impressed when they saw Rostov's rapid,
firm steps and resolute, frowning face.
After the hussars had come to the village and Rostov had gone to see the
princess, a certain confusion and dissension had arisen among the crowd.
Some of the peasants said that these new arrivals were Russians and might
take it amiss that the mistress was being detained. Dron was of this opinion,
but as soon as he expressed it Karp and others attacked their ex-Elder.
"How many years have you been fattening on the commune?" Karp shouted at
him. "It's all one to you! You'll dig up your pot of money and take it away with
you.... What does it matter to you whether our homes are ruined or not?"
"We've been told to keep order, and that no one is to leave their homes or take
away a single grain, and that's all about it!" cried another.
"It was your son's turn to be conscripted, but no fear! You begrudged your
lump of a son," a little old man suddenly began attacking Dron—"and so they
took my Vanka to be shaved for a soldier! But we all have to die."
"To be sure, we all have to die. I'm not against the commune," said Dron.
"That's it—not against it! You've filled your belly...."
The two tall peasants had their say. As soon as Rostov, followed by Ilyin,
Lavrushka, and Alpatych, came up to the crowd, Karp, thrusting his fingers
into his belt and smiling a little, walked to the front. Dron on the contrary
retired to the rear and the crowd drew closer together.
"Who is your Elder here? Hey?" shouted Rostov, coming up to the crowd with
quick steps.
"The Elder? What do you want with him?..." asked Karp.
But before the words were well out of his mouth, his cap flew off and a fierce
blow jerked his head to one side.
"Caps off, traitors!" shouted Rostov in a wrathful voice. "Where's the Elder?"
he cried furiously.
"The Elder.... He wants the Elder!... Dron Zakharych, you!" meek and
flustered voices here and there were heard calling and caps began to come off
their heads.
"We don't riot, we're following the orders," declared Karp, and at that moment
several voices began speaking together.
"It's as the old men have decided—there's too many of you giving orders."
"Arguing? Mutiny!... Brigands! Traitors!" cried Rostov unmeaningly in a
voice not his own, gripping Karp by the collar. "Bind him, bind him!" he
shouted, though there was no one to bind him but Lavrushka and Alpatych.
Lavrushka, however, ran up to Karp and seized him by the arms from behind.
"Shall I call up our men from beyond the hill?" he called out.
Alpatych turned to the peasants and ordered two of them by name to come and
bind Karp. The men obediently came out of the crowd and began taking off
their belts.
"Where's the Elder?" demanded Rostov in a loud voice.
With a pale and frowning face Dron stepped out of the crowd.
"Are you the Elder? Bind him, Lavrushka!" shouted Rostov, as if that order,
too, could not possibly meet with any opposition.
And in fact two more peasants began binding Dron, who took off his own belt
and handed it to them, as if to aid them.
"And you all listen to me!" said Rostov to the peasants. "Be off to your houses
at once, and don't let one of your voices be heard!"
"Why, we've not done any harm! We did it just out of foolishness. It's all
nonsense... I said then that it was not in order," voices were heard bickering
with one another.
"There! What did I say?" said Alpatych, coming into his own again. "It's
wrong, lads!"
"All our stupidity, Yakov Alpatych," came the answers, and the
crowd began at once to disperse through the village.
The two bound men were led off to the master's house. The two drunken
peasants followed them.
"Aye, when I look at you!..." said one of them to Karp.
"How can one talk to the masters like that? What were you thinking of, you
fool?" added the other—"A real fool!"
Two hours later the carts were standing in the courtyard of the Bogucharovo
house. The peasants were briskly carrying out the proprietor's goods and
packing them on the carts, and Dron, liberated at Princess Mary's wish from
the cupboard where he had been confined, was standing in the yard directing
the men.
"Don't put it in so carelessly," said one of the peasants, a man with a round
smiling face, taking a casket from a housemaid. "You know it has cost money!
How can you chuck it in like that or shove it under the cord where it'll get
rubbed? I don't like that way of doing things. Let it all be done properly,
according to rule. Look here, put it under the bast matting and cover it with
hay—that's the way!"
"Eh, books, books!" said another peasant, bringing out Prince Andrew's library
cupboards. "Don't catch up against it! It's heavy, lads—solid books."
"Yes, they worked all day and didn't play!" remarked the tall, round-faced
peasant gravely, pointing with a significant wink at the dictionaries that were
on the top.
Unwilling to obtrude himself on the princess, Rostov did not go back to the
house but remained in the village awaiting her departure. When her carriage
drove out of the house, he mounted and accompanied her eight miles from
Bogucharovo to where the road was occupied by our troops. At the inn at
Yankovo he respectfully took leave of her, for the first time permitting himself
to kiss her hand.
"How can you speak so!" he blushingly replied to Princess Mary's expressions
of gratitude for her deliverance, as she termed what had occurred. "Any police
officer would have done as much! If we had had only peasants to fight, we
should not have let the enemy come so far," said he with a sense of shame and
wishing to change the subject. "I am only happy to have had the opportunity of
making your acquaintance. Good-bye, Princess. I wish you happiness and
consolation and hope to meet you again in happier circumstances. If you don't
want to make me blush, please don't thank me!"
But the princess, if she did not again thank him in words, thanked him with the
whole expression of her face, radiant with gratitude and tenderness. She could
not believe that there was nothing to thank him for. On the contrary, it seemed
to her certain that had he not been there she would have perished at the hands
of the mutineers and of the French, and that he had exposed himself to terrible
and obvious danger to save her, and even more certain was it that he was a
man of lofty and noble soul, able to understand her position and her sorrow.
His kind, honest eyes, with the tears rising in them when she herself had begun
to cry as she spoke of her loss, did not leave her memory.
When she had taken leave of him and remained alone she suddenly felt her
eyes filling with tears, and then not for the first time the strange question
presented itself to her: did she love him?
On the rest of the way to Moscow, though the princess' position was not a
cheerful one, Dunyasha, who went with her in the carriage, more than once
noticed that her mistress leaned out of the window and smiled at something
with an expression of mingled joy and sorrow.
"Well, supposing I do love him?" thought Princess Mary.
Ashamed as she was of acknowledging to herself that she had fallen in love
with a man who would perhaps never love her, she comforted herself with the
thought that no one would ever know it and that she would not be to blame if,
without ever speaking of it to anyone, she continued to the end of her life to
love the man with whom she had fallen in love for the first and last time in her
life.
Sometimes when she recalled his looks, his sympathy, and his words,
happiness did not appear impossible to her. It was at those moments that
Dunyasha noticed her smiling as she looked out of the carriage window.
"Was it not fate that brought him to Bogucharovo, and at that very moment?"
thought Princess Mary. "And that caused his sister to refuse my brother?" And
in all this Princess Mary saw the hand of Providence.
The impression the princess made on Rostov was a very agreeable one. To
remember her gave him pleasure, and when his comrades, hearing of his
adventure at Bogucharovo, rallied him on having gone to look for hay and
having picked up one of the wealthiest heiresses in Russia, he grew angry. It
made him angry just because the idea of marrying the gentle Princess Mary,
who was attractive to him and had an enormous fortune, had against his will
more than once entered his head. For himself personally Nicholas could not
wish for a better wife: by marrying her he would make the countess his mother
happy, would be able to put his father's affairs in order, and would even—he
felt it—ensure Princess Mary's happiness.
But Sonya? And his plighted word? That was why Rostov grew angry when
he was rallied about Princess Bolkonskaya.
CHAPTER XV
On receiving command of the armies Kutuzov remembered Prince Andrew
and sent an order for him to report at headquarters.
Prince Andrew arrived at Tsarevo-Zaymishche on the very day and at the very
hour that Kutuzov was reviewing the troops for the first time. He stopped in
the village at the priest's house in front of which stood the commander-in-
chief's carriage, and he sat down on the bench at the gate awaiting his Serene
Highness, as everyone now called Kutuzov. From the field beyond the village
came now sounds of regimental music and now the roar of many voices
shouting "Hurrah!" to the new commander-in-chief. Two orderlies, a courier
and a major-domo, stood near by, some ten paces from Prince Andrew,
availing themselves of Kutuzov's absence and of the fine weather. A short,
swarthy lieutenant colonel of hussars with thick mustaches and whiskers rode
up to the gate and, glancing at Prince Andrew, inquired whether his Serene
Highness was putting up there and whether he would soon be back.
Prince Andrew replied that he was not on his Serene Highness' staff but was
himself a new arrival. The lieutenant colonel turned to a smart orderly, who,
with the peculiar contempt with which a commander-in-chief's orderly speaks
to officers, replied:
"What? His Serene Highness? I expect he'll be here soon. What do you want?"
The lieutenant colonel of hussars smiled beneath his mustache at the orderly's
tone, dismounted, gave his horse to a dispatch runner, and approached
Bolkonski with a slight bow. Bolkonski made room for him on the bench and
the lieutenant colonel sat down beside him.
"You're also waiting for the commander-in-chief?" said he. "They say he
weceives evewyone, thank God!... It's awful with those sausage eaters!
Ermolov had weason to ask to be pwomoted to be a German! Now p'waps
Wussians will get a look in. As it was, devil only knows what was happening.
We kept wetweating and wetweating. Did you take part in the campaign?" he
asked.
"I had the pleasure," replied Prince Andrew, "not only of taking part in the
retreat but of losing in that retreat all I held dear—not to mention the estate
and home of my birth—my father, who died of grief. I belong to the province
of Smolensk."
"Ah? You're Pwince Bolkonski? Vewy glad to make your acquaintance! I'm
Lieutenant Colonel Denisov, better known as 'Vaska,'" said Denisov, pressing
Prince Andrew's hand and looking into his face with a particularly kindly
attention. "Yes, I heard," said he sympathetically, and after a short pause
added: "Yes, it's Scythian warfare. It's all vewy well—only not for those who
get it in the neck. So you are Pwince Andwew Bolkonski?" He swayed his
head. "Vewy pleased, Pwince, to make your acquaintance!" he repeated again,
smiling sadly, and he again pressed Prince Andrew's hand.
Prince Andrew knew Denisov from what Natasha had told him of her first
suitor. This memory carried him sadly and sweetly back to those painful
feelings of which he had not thought lately, but which still found place in his
soul. Of late he had received so many new and very serious impressions—
such as the retreat from Smolensk, his visit to Bald Hills, and the recent news
of his father's death—and had experienced so many emotions, that for a long
time past those memories had not entered his mind, and now that they did,
they did not act on him with nearly their former strength. For Denisov, too, the
memories awakened by the name of Bolkonski belonged to a distant, romantic
past, when after supper and after Natasha's singing he had proposed to a little
girl of fifteen without realizing what he was doing. He smiled at the
recollection of that time and of his love for Natasha, and passed at once to
what now interested him passionately and exclusively. This was a plan of
campaign he had devised while serving at the outposts during the retreat. He
had proposed that plan to Barclay de Tolly and now wished to propose it to
Kutuzov. The plan was based on the fact that the French line of operation was
too extended, and it proposed that instead of, or concurrently with, action on
the front to bar the advance of the French, we should attack their line of
communication. He began explaining his plan to Prince Andrew.
"They can't hold all that line. It's impossible. I will undertake to bweak
thwough. Give me five hundwed men and I will bweak the line, that's certain!
There's only one way—guewilla warfare!"
Denisov rose and began gesticulating as he explained his plan to Bolkonski. In
the midst of his explanation shouts were heard from the army, growing more
incoherent and more diffused, mingling with music and songs and coming
from the field where the review was held. Sounds of hoofs and shouts were
nearing the village.
"He's coming! He's coming!" shouted a Cossack standing at the gate.
Bolkonski and Denisov moved to the gate, at which a knot of soldiers (a guard
of honor) was standing, and they saw Kutuzov coming down the street
mounted on a rather small sorrel horse. A huge suite of generals rode behind
him. Barclay was riding almost beside him, and a crowd of officers ran after
and around them shouting, "Hurrah!"
His adjutants galloped into the yard before him. Kutuzov was impatiently
urging on his horse, which ambled smoothly under his weight, and he raised
his hand to his white Horse Guard's cap with a red band and no peak, nodding
his head continually. When he came up to the guard of honor, a fine set of
Grenadiers mostly wearing decorations, who were giving him the salute, he
looked at them silently and attentively for nearly a minute with the steady gaze
of a commander and then turned to the crowd of generals and officers
surrounding him. Suddenly his face assumed a subtle expression, he shrugged
his shoulders with an air of perplexity.
"And with such fine fellows to retreat and retreat! Well, good-by, General," he
added, and rode into the yard past Prince Andrew and Denisov.
"Hurrah! hurrah! hurrah!" shouted those behind him.
Since Prince Andrew had last seen him Kutuzov had grown still more
corpulent, flaccid, and fat. But the bleached eyeball, the scar, and the familiar
weariness of his expression were still the same. He was wearing the white
Horse Guard's cap and a military overcoat with a whip hanging over his
shoulder by a thin strap. He sat heavily and swayed limply on his brisk little
horse.
"Whew... whew... whew!" he whistled just audibly as he rode into the yard.
His face expressed the relief of relaxed strain felt by a man who means to rest
after a ceremony. He drew his left foot out of the stirrup and, lurching with his
whole body and puckering his face with the effort, raised it with difficulty
onto the saddle, leaned on his knee, groaned, and slipped down into the arms
of the Cossacks and adjutants who stood ready to assist him.
He pulled himself together, looked round, screwing up his eyes, glanced at
Prince Andrew, and, evidently not recognizing him, moved with his waddling
gait to the porch. "Whew... whew... whew!" he whistled, and again glanced at
Prince Andrew. As often occurs with old men, it was only after some seconds
that the impression produced by Prince Andrew's face linked itself up with
Kutuzov's remembrance of his personality.
"Ah, how do you do, my dear prince? How do you do, my dear boy? Come
along..." said he, glancing wearily round, and he stepped onto the porch which
creaked under his weight.
He unbuttoned his coat and sat down on a bench in the porch.
"And how's your father?"
"I received news of his death, yesterday," replied Prince Andrew abruptly.
Kutuzov looked at him with eyes wide open with dismay and then took off his
cap and crossed himself:
"May the kingdom of Heaven be his! God's will be done to us all!" He sighed
deeply, his whole chest heaving, and was silent for a while. "I loved him and
respected him, and sympathize with you with all my heart."
He embraced Prince Andrew, pressing him to his fat breast, and for some time
did not let him go. When he released him Prince Andrew saw that Kutuzov's
flabby lips were trembling and that tears were in his eyes. He sighed and
pressed on the bench with both hands to raise himself.
"Come! Come with me, we'll have a talk," said he.
But at that moment Denisov, no more intimidated by his superiors than by the
enemy, came with jingling spurs up the steps of the porch, despite the angry
whispers of the adjutants who tried to stop him. Kutuzov, his hands still
pressed on the seat, glanced at him glumly. Denisov, having given his name,
announced that he had to communicate to his Serene Highness a matter of
great importance for their country's welfare. Kutuzov looked wearily at him
and, lifting his hands with a gesture of annoyance, folded them across his
stomach, repeating the words: "For our country's welfare? Well, what is it?
Speak!" Denisov blushed like a girl (it was strange to see the color rise in that
shaggy, bibulous, time-worn face) and boldly began to expound his plan of
cutting the enemy's lines of communication between Smolensk and Vyazma.
Denisov came from those parts and knew the country well. His plan seemed
decidedly a good one, especially from the strength of conviction with which
he spoke. Kutuzov looked down at his own legs, occasionally glancing at the
door of the adjoining hut as if expecting something unpleasant to emerge from
it. And from that hut, while Denisov was speaking, a general with a portfolio
under his arm really did appear.
"What?" said Kutuzov, in the midst of Denisov's explanations, "are you ready
so soon?"
"Ready, your Serene Highness," replied the general.
Kutuzov swayed his head, as much as to say: "How is one man to deal with it
all?" and again listened to Denisov.
"I give my word of honor as a Wussian officer," said Denisov, "that I can
bweak Napoleon's line of communication!"
"What relation are you to Intendant General Kiril Andreevich Denisov?" asked
Kutuzov, interrupting him.
"He is my uncle, your Sewene Highness."
"Ah, we were friends," said Kutuzov cheerfully. "All right, all right, friend,
stay here at the staff and tomorrow we'll have a talk."
With a nod to Denisov he turned away and put out his hand for the papers
Konovnitsyn had brought him.
"Would not your Serene Highness like to come inside?" said the general on
duty in a discontented voice, "the plans must be examined and several papers
have to be signed."
An adjutant came out and announced that everything was in readiness within.
But Kutuzov evidently did not wish to enter that room till he was disengaged.
He made a grimace...
"No, tell them to bring a small table out here, my dear boy. I'll look at them
here," said he. "Don't go away," he added, turning to Prince Andrew, who
remained in the porch and listened to the general's report.
While this was being given, Prince Andrew heard the whisper of a woman's
voice and the rustle of a silk dress behind the door. Several times on glancing
that way he noticed behind that door a plump, rosy, handsome woman in a
pink dress with a lilac silk kerchief on her head, holding a dish and evidently
awaiting the entrance of the commander-in-chief. Kutuzov's adjutant
whispered to Prince Andrew that this was the wife of the priest whose home it
was, and that she intended to offer his Serene Highness bread and salt. "Her
husband has welcomed his Serene Highness with the cross at the church, and
she intends to welcome him in the house.... She's very pretty," added the
adjutant with a smile. At those words Kutuzov looked round. He was listening
to the general's report—which consisted chiefly of a criticism of the position
at Tsarevo-Zaymishche—as he had listened to Denisov, and seven years
previously had listened to the discussion at the Austerlitz council of war. He
evidently listened only because he had ears which, though there was a piece of
tow in one of them, could not help hearing; but it was evident that nothing the
general could say would surprise or even interest him, that he knew all that
would be said beforehand, and heard it all only because he had to, as one has
to listen to the chanting of a service of prayer. All that Denisov had said was
clever and to the point. What the general was saying was even more clever and
to the point, but it was evident that Kutuzov despised knowledge and
cleverness, and knew of something else that would decide the matter—
something independent of cleverness and knowledge. Prince Andrew watched
the commander-in-chief's face attentively, and the only expression he could
see there was one of boredom, curiosity as to the meaning of the feminine
whispering behind the door, and a desire to observe propriety. It was evident
that Kutuzov despised cleverness and learning and even the patriotic feeling
shown by Denisov, but despised them not because of his own intellect,
feelings, or knowledge—he did not try to display any of these—but because of
something else. He despised them because of his old age and experience of
life. The only instruction Kutuzov gave of his own accord during that report
referred to looting by the Russian troops. At the end of the report the general
put before him for signature a paper relating to the recovery of payment from
army commanders for green oats mown down by the soldiers, when
landowners lodged petitions for compensation.
After hearing the matter, Kutuzov smacked his lips together and shook his
head.
"Into the stove... into the fire with it! I tell you once for all, my dear fellow,"
said he, "into the fire with all such things! Let them cut the crops and burn
wood to their hearts' content. I don't order it or allow it, but I don't exact
compensation either. One can't get on without it. 'When wood is chopped the
chips will fly.'" He looked at the paper again. "Oh, this German precision!" he
muttered, shaking his head.
CHAPTER XVI
"Well, that's all!" said Kutuzov as he signed the last of the documents, and
rising heavily and smoothing out the folds in his fat white neck he moved
toward the door with a more cheerful expression.
The priest's wife, flushing rosy red, caught up the dish she had after all not
managed to present at the right moment, though she had so long been
preparing for it, and with a low bow offered it to Kutuzov.
He screwed up his eyes, smiled, lifted her chin with his hand, and said:
"Ah, what a beauty! Thank you, sweetheart!"
He took some gold pieces from his trouser pocket and put them on the dish for
her. "Well, my dear, and how are we getting on?" he asked, moving to the door
of the room assigned to him. The priest's wife smiled, and with dimples in her
rosy cheeks followed him into the room. The adjutant came out to the porch
and asked Prince Andrew to lunch with him. Half an hour later Prince Andrew
was again called to Kutuzov. He found him reclining in an armchair, still in the
same unbuttoned overcoat. He had in his hand a French book which he closed
as Prince Andrew entered, marking the place with a knife. Prince Andrew saw
by the cover that it was Les Chevaliers du Cygne by Madame de Genlis.
"Well, sit down, sit down here. Let's have a talk," said Kutuzov. "It's sad, very
sad. But remember, my dear fellow, that I am a father to you, a second
father...."
Prince Andrew told Kutuzov all he knew of his father's death, and what he had
seen at Bald Hills when he passed through it.
"What... what they have brought us to!" Kutuzov suddenly cried in an agitated
voice, evidently picturing vividly to himself from Prince Andrew's story the
condition Russia was in. "But give me time, give me time!" he said with a
grim look, evidently not wishing to continue this agitating conversation, and
added: "I sent for you to keep you with me."
"I thank your Serene Highness, but I fear I am no longer fit for the staff,"
replied Prince Andrew with a smile which Kutuzov noticed.
Kutuzov glanced inquiringly at him.
"But above all," added Prince Andrew, "I have grown used to my regiment, am
fond of the officers, and I fancy the men also like me. I should be sorry to
leave the regiment. If I decline the honor of being with you, believe me..."
A shrewd, kindly, yet subtly derisive expression lit up Kutuzov's podgy face.
He cut Bolkonski short.
"I am sorry, for I need you. But you're right, you're right! It's not here that men
are needed. Advisers are always plentiful, but men are not. The regiments
would not be what they are if the would-be advisers served there as you do. I
remember you at Austerlitz.... I remember, yes, I remember you with the
standard!" said Kutuzov, and a flush of pleasure suffused Prince Andrew's face
at this recollection.
Taking his hand and drawing him downwards, Kutuzov offered his cheek to be
kissed, and again Prince Andrew noticed tears in the old man's eyes. Though
Prince Andrew knew that Kutuzov's tears came easily, and that he was
particularly tender to and considerate of him from a wish to show sympathy
with his loss, yet this reminder of Austerlitz was both pleasant and flattering to
him.
"Go your way and God be with you. I know your path is the path of honor!"
He paused. "I missed you at Bucharest, but I needed someone to send." And
changing the subject, Kutuzov began to speak of the Turkish war and the
peace that had been concluded. "Yes, I have been much blamed," he said,
"both for that war and the peace... but everything came at the right time. Tout
vient a point a celui qui sait attendre. * And there were as many advisers there
as here..." he went on, returning to the subject of "advisers" which evidently
occupied him. "Ah, those advisers!" said he. "If we had listened to them all we
should not have made peace with Turkey and should not have been through
with that war. Everything in haste, but more haste, less speed. Kamenski
would have been lost if he had not died. He stormed fortresses with thirty
thousand men. It is not difficult to capture a fortress but it is difficult to win a
campaign. For that, not storming and attacking but patience and time are
wanted. Kamenski sent soldiers to Rustchuk, but I only employed these two
things and took more fortresses than Kamenski and made them Turks eat
horseflesh!" He swayed his head. "And the French shall too, believe me," he
went on, growing warmer and beating his chest, "I'll make them eat
horseflesh!" And tears again dimmed his eyes.
* "Everything comes in time to him who knows how to wait."
"But shan't we have to accept battle?" remarked Prince Andrew.
"We shall if everybody wants it; it can't be helped.... But believe me, my dear
boy, there is nothing stronger than those two: patience and time, they will do it
all. But the advisers n'entendent pas de cette oreille, voila le mal. * Some want
a thing—others don't. What's one to do?" he asked, evidently expecting an
answer. "Well, what do you want us to do?" he repeated and his eye shone
with a deep, shrewd look. "I'll tell you what to do," he continued, as Prince
Andrew still did not reply: "I will tell you what to do, and what I do. Dans le
doute, mon cher," he paused, "abstiens-toi" *(2)—he articulated the French
proverb deliberately.
* "Don't see it that way, that's the trouble."
* (2) "When in doubt, my dear fellow, do nothing."
"Well, good-by, my dear fellow; remember that with all my heart I share your
sorrow, and that for you I am not a Serene Highness, nor a prince, nor a
commander-in-chief, but a father! If you want anything come straight to me.
Good-bye, my dear boy."
Again he embraced and kissed Prince Andrew, but before the latter had left the
room Kutuzov gave a sigh of relief and went on with his unfinished novel, Les
Chevaliers du Cygne by Madame de Genlis.
Prince Andrew could not have explained how or why it was, but after that
interview with Kutuzov he went back to his regiment reassured as to the
general course of affairs and as to the man to whom it had been entrusted. The
more he realized the absence of all personal motive in that old man—in whom
there seemed to remain only the habit of passions, and in place of an intellect
(grouping events and drawing conclusions) only the capacity calmly to
contemplate the course of events—the more reassured he was that everything
would be as it should. "He will not bring in any plan of his own. He will not
devise or undertake anything," thought Prince Andrew, "but he will hear
everything, remember everything, and put everything in its place. He will not
hinder anything useful nor allow anything harmful. He understands that there
is something stronger and more important than his own will—the inevitable
course of events, and he can see them and grasp their significance, and seeing
that significance can refrain from meddling and renounce his personal wish
directed to something else. And above all," thought Prince Andrew, "one
believes in him because he's Russian, despite the novel by Genlis and the
French proverbs, and because his voice shook when he said: 'What they have
brought us to!' and had a sob in it when he said he would 'make them eat
horseflesh!'"
On such feelings, more or less dimly shared by all, the unanimity and general
approval were founded with which, despite court influences, the popular
choice of Kutuzov as commander-in-chief was received.
CHAPTER XVII
After the Emperor had left Moscow, life flowed on there in its usual course,
and its course was so very usual that it was difficult to remember the recent
days of patriotic elation and ardor, hard to believe that Russia was really in
danger and that the members of the English Club were also sons of the
Fatherland ready to sacrifice everything for it. The one thing that recalled the
patriotic fervor everyone had displayed during the Emperor's stay was the call
for contributions of men and money, a necessity that as soon as the promises
had been made assumed a legal, official form and became unavoidable.
With the enemy's approach to Moscow, the Moscovites' view of their situation
did not grow more serious but on the contrary became even more frivolous, as
always happens with people who see a great danger approaching. At the
approach of danger there are always two voices that speak with equal power in
the human soul: one very reasonably tells a man to consider the nature of the
danger and the means of escaping it; the other, still more reasonably, says that
it is too depressing and painful to think of the danger, since it is not in man's
power to foresee everything and avert the general course of events, and it is
therefore better to disregard what is painful till it comes, and to think about
what is pleasant. In solitude a man generally listens to the first voice, but in
society to the second. So it was now with the inhabitants of Moscow. It was
long since people had been as gay in Moscow as that year.
Rostopchin's broadsheets, headed by woodcuts of a drink shop, a potman, and
a Moscow burgher called Karpushka Chigirin, "who—having been a
militiaman and having had rather too much at the pub—heard that Napoleon
wished to come to Moscow, grew angry, abused the French in very bad
language, came out of the drink shop, and, under the sign of the eagle, began
to address the assembled people," were read and discussed, together with the
latest of Vasili Lvovich Pushkin's bouts rimes.
In the corner room at the club, members gathered to read these broadsheets,
and some liked the way Karpushka jeered at the French, saying: "They will
swell up with Russian cabbage, burst with our buckwheat porridge, and choke
themselves with cabbage soup. They are all dwarfs and one peasant woman
will toss three of them with a hayfork." Others did not like that tone and said it
was stupid and vulgar. It was said that Rostopchin had expelled all Frenchmen
and even all foreigners from Moscow, and that there had been some spies and
agents of Napoleon among them; but this was told chiefly to introduce
Rostopchin's witty remark on that occasion. The foreigners were deported to
Nizhni by boat, and Rostopchin had said to them in French: "Rentrez en
vousmemes; entrez dans la barque, et n'en faites pas une barque de Charon." *
There was talk of all the government offices having been already removed
from Moscow, and to this Shinshin's witticism was added—that for that alone
Moscow ought to be grateful to Napoleon. It was said that Mamonov's
regiment would cost him eight hundred thousand rubles, and that Bezukhov
had spent even more on his, but that the best thing about Bezukhov's action
was that he himself was going to don a uniform and ride at the head of his
regiment without charging anything for the show.
* "Think it over; get into the barque, and take care not to
make it a barque of Charon."
"You don't spare anyone," said Julie Drubetskaya as she collected and pressed
together a bunch of raveled lint with her thin, beringed fingers.
Julie was preparing to leave Moscow next day and was giving a farewell
soiree.
"Bezukhov est ridicule, but he is so kind and good-natured. What pleasure is
there to be so caustique?"
"A forfeit!" cried a young man in militia uniform whom Julie called "mon
chevalier," and who was going with her to Nizhni.
In Julie's set, as in many other circles in Moscow, it had been agreed that they
would speak nothing but Russian and that those who made a slip and spoke
French should pay fines to the Committee of Voluntary Contributions.
"Another forfeit for a Gallicism," said a Russian writer who was present.
"'What pleasure is there to be' is not Russian!"
"You spare no one," continued Julie to the young man without heeding the
author's remark.
"For caustique—I am guilty and will pay, and I am prepared to pay again for
the pleasure of telling you the truth. For Gallicisms I won't be responsible,"
she remarked, turning to the author: "I have neither the money nor the time,
like Prince Galitsyn, to engage a master to teach me Russian!"
"Ah, here he is!" she added. "Quand on... No, no," she said to the militia
officer, "you won't catch me. Speak of the sun and you see its rays!" and she
smiled amiably at Pierre. "We were just talking of you," she said with the
facility in lying natural to a society woman. "We were saying that your
regiment would be sure to be better than Mamonov's."
"Oh, don't talk to me of my regiment," replied Pierre, kissing his hostess' hand
and taking a seat beside her. "I am so sick of it."
"You will, of course, command it yourself?" said Julie, directing a sly,
sarcastic glance toward the militia officer.
The latter in Pierre's presence had ceased to be caustic, and his face expressed
perplexity as to what Julie's smile might mean. In spite of his absentmindedness
and good nature, Pierre's personality immediately checked any
attempt to ridicule him to his face.
"No," said Pierre, with a laughing glance at his big, stout body. "I should make
too good a target for the French, besides I am afraid I should hardly be able to
climb onto a horse."
Among those whom Julie's guests happened to choose to gossip about were
the Rostovs.
"I hear that their affairs are in a very bad way," said Julie. "And he is so
unreasonable, the count himself I mean. The Razumovskis wanted to buy his
house and his estate near Moscow, but it drags on and on. He asks too much."
"No, I think the sale will come off in a few days," said someone. "Though it is
madness to buy anything in Moscow now."
"Why?" asked Julie. "You don't think Moscow is in danger?"
"Then why are you leaving?"
"I? What a question! I am going because... well, because everyone is going:
and besides—I am not Joan of Arc or an Amazon."
"Well, of course, of course! Let me have some more strips of linen."
"If he manages the business properly he will be able to pay off all his debts,"
said the militia officer, speaking of Rostov.
"A kindly old man but not up to much. And why do they stay on so long in
Moscow? They meant to leave for the country long ago. Natalie is quite well
again now, isn't she?" Julie asked Pierre with a knowing smile.
"They are waiting for their younger son," Pierre replied. "He joined
Obolenski's Cossacks and went to Belaya Tserkov where the regiment is being
formed. But now they have had him transferred to my regiment and are
expecting him every day. The count wanted to leave long ago, but the countess
won't on any account leave Moscow till her son returns."
"I met them the day before yesterday at the Arkharovs'. Natalie has recovered
her looks and is brighter. She sang a song. How easily some people get over
everything!"
"Get over what?" inquired Pierre, looking displeased.
Julie smiled.
"You know, Count, such knights as you are only found in Madame de Souza's
novels."
"What knights? What do you mean?" demanded Pierre, blushing.
"Oh, come, my dear count! C'est la fable de tout Moscou. Je vous admire, ma
parole d'honneur!" *
* "It is the talk of all Moscow. My word, I admire you!"
"Forfeit, forfeit!" cried the militia officer.
"All right, one can't talk—how tiresome!"
"What is 'the talk of all Moscow'?" Pierre asked angrily, rising to his feet.
"Come now, Count, you know!"
"I don't know anything about it," said Pierre.
"I know you were friendly with Natalie, and so... but I was always more
friendly with Vera—that dear Vera."
"No, madame!" Pierre continued in a tone of displeasure, "I have not taken on
myself the role of Natalie Rostova's knight at all, and have not been to their
house for nearly a month. But I cannot understand the cruelty..."
"Qui s'excuse s'accuse," * said Julie, smiling and waving the lint triumphantly,
and to have the last word she promptly changed the subject. "Do you know
what I heard today? Poor Mary Bolkonskaya arrived in Moscow yesterday. Do
you know that she has lost her father?"
* "Who excuses himself, accuses himself."
"Really? Where is she? I should like very much to see her," said Pierre.
"I spent the evening with her yesterday. She is going to their estate near
Moscow either today or tomorrow morning, with her nephew."
"Well, and how is she?" asked Pierre.
"She is well, but sad. But do you know who rescued her? It is quite a romance.
Nicholas Rostov! She was surrounded, and they wanted to kill her and had
wounded some of her people. He rushed in and saved her...."
"Another romance," said the militia officer. "Really, this general flight has
been arranged to get all the old maids married off. Catiche is one and Princess
Bolkonskaya another."
"Do you know, I really believe she is un petit peu amoureuse du jeune
homme." *
* "A little bit in love with the young man."
"Forfeit, forfeit, forfeit!"
"But how could one say that in Russian?"
CHAPTER XVIII
When Pierre returned home he was handed two of Rostopchin's broadsheets
that had been brought that day.
The first declared that the report that Count Rostopchin had forbidden people
to leave Moscow was false; on the contrary he was glad that ladies and
tradesmen's wives were leaving the city. "There will be less panic and less
gossip," ran the broadsheet "but I will stake my life on it that scoundrel will
not enter Moscow." These words showed Pierre clearly for the first time that
the French would enter Moscow. The second broadsheet stated that our
headquarters were at Vyazma, that Count Wittgenstein had defeated the
French, but that as many of the inhabitants of Moscow wished to be armed,
weapons were ready for them at the arsenal: sabers, pistols, and muskets
which could be had at a low price. The tone of the proclamation was not as
jocose as in the former Chigirin talks. Pierre pondered over these broadsheets.
Evidently the terrible stormcloud he had desired with the whole strength of his
soul but which yet aroused involuntary horror in him was drawing near.
"Shall I join the army and enter the service, or wait?" he asked himself for the
hundredth time. He took a pack of cards that lay on the table and began to lay
them out for a game of patience.
"If this patience comes out," he said to himself after shuffling the cards,
holding them in his hand, and lifting his head, "if it comes out, it means... what
does it mean?"
He had not decided what it should mean when he heard the voice of the eldest
princess at the door asking whether she might come in.
"Then it will mean that I must go to the army," said Pierre to himself. "Come
in, come in!" he added to the princess.
Only the eldest princess, the one with the stony face and long waist, was still
living in Pierre's house. The two younger ones had both married.
"Excuse my coming to you, cousin," she said in a reproachful and agitated
voice. "You know some decision must be come to. What is going to happen?
Everyone has left Moscow and the people are rioting. How is it that we are
staying on?"
"On the contrary, things seem satisfactory, ma cousine," said Pierre in the
bantering tone he habitually adopted toward her, always feeling uncomfortable
in the role of her benefactor.
"Satisfactory, indeed! Very satisfactory! Barbara Ivanovna told me today how
our troops are distinguishing themselves. It certainly does them credit! And
the people too are quite mutinous—they no longer obey, even my maid has
taken to being rude. At this rate they will soon begin beating us. One can't
walk in the streets. But, above all, the French will be here any day now, so
what are we waiting for? I ask just one thing of you, cousin," she went on,
"arrange for me to be taken to Petersburg. Whatever I may be, I can't live
under Bonaparte's rule."
"Oh, come, ma cousine! Where do you get your information from? On the
contrary..."
"I won't submit to your Napoleon! Others may if they please.... If you don't
want to do this..."
"But I will, I'll give the order at once."
The princess was apparently vexed at not having anyone to be angry with.
Muttering to herself, she sat down on a chair.
"But you have been misinformed," said Pierre. "Everything is quiet in the city
and there is not the slightest danger. See! I've just been reading..." He showed
her the broadsheet. "Count Rostopchin writes that he will stake his life on it
that the enemy will not enter Moscow."
"Oh, that count of yours!" said the princess malevolently. "He is a hypocrite, a
rascal who has himself roused the people to riot. Didn't he write in those
idiotic broadsheets that anyone, 'whoever it might be, should be dragged to the
lockup by his hair'? (How silly!) 'And honor and glory to whoever captures
him,' he says. This is what his cajolery has brought us to! Barbara Ivanovna
told me the mob near killed her because she said something in French."
"Oh, but it's so... You take everything so to heart," said Pierre, and began
laying out his cards for patience.
Although that patience did come out, Pierre did not join the army, but
remained in deserted Moscow ever in the same state of agitation, irresolution,
and alarm, yet at the same time joyfully expecting something terrible.
Next day toward evening the princess set off, and Pierre's head steward came
to inform him that the money needed for the equipment of his regiment could
not be found without selling one of the estates. In general the head steward
made out to Pierre that his project of raising a regiment would ruin him. Pierre
listened to him, scarcely able to repress a smile.
"Well then, sell it," said he. "What's to be done? I can't draw back now!"
The worse everything became, especially his own affairs, the better was Pierre
pleased and the more evident was it that the catastrophe he expected was
approaching. Hardly anyone he knew was left in town. Julie had gone, and so
had Princess Mary. Of his intimate friends only the Rostovs remained, but he
did not go to see them.
To distract his thoughts he drove that day to the village of Vorontsovo to see
the great balloon Leppich was constructing to destroy the foe, and a trial
balloon that was to go up next day. The balloon was not yet ready, but Pierre
learned that it was being constructed by the Emperor's desire. The Emperor
had written to Count Rostopchin as follows:
As soon as Leppich is ready, get together a crew of reliable and intelligent
men for his car and send a courier to General Kutuzov to let him know. I have
informed him of the matter.
Please impress upon Leppich to be very careful where he descends for the first
time, that he may not make a mistake and fall into the enemy's hands. It is
essential for him to combine his movements with those of the commander-inchief.
On his way home from Vorontsovo, as he was passing the Bolotnoe Place
Pierre, seeing a large crowd round the Lobnoe Place, stopped and got out of
his trap. A French cook accused of being a spy was being flogged. The
flogging was only just over, and the executioner was releasing from the
flogging bench a stout man with red whiskers, in blue stockings and a green
jacket, who was moaning piteously. Another criminal, thin and pale, stood
near. Judging by their faces they were both Frenchmen. With a frightened and
suffering look resembling that on the thin Frenchman's face, Pierre pushed his
way in through the crowd.
"What is it? Who is it? What is it for?" he kept asking.
But the attention of the crowd—officials, burghers, shopkeepers, peasants, and
women in cloaks and in pelisses—was so eagerly centered on what was
passing in Lobnoe Place that no one answered him. The stout man rose,
frowned, shrugged his shoulders, and evidently trying to appear firm began to
pull on his jacket without looking about him, but suddenly his lips trembled
and he began to cry, in the way full-blooded grown-up men cry, though angry
with himself for doing so. In the crowd people began talking loudly, to stifle
their feelings of pity as it seemed to Pierre.
"He's cook to some prince."
"Eh, mounseer, Russian sauce seems to be sour to a Frenchman... sets his teeth
on edge!" said a wrinkled clerk who was standing behind Pierre, when the
Frenchman began to cry.
The clerk glanced round, evidently hoping that his joke would be appreciated.
Some people began to laugh, others continued to watch in dismay the
executioner who was undressing the other man.
Pierre choked, his face puckered, and he turned hastily away, went back to his
trap muttering something to himself as he went, and took his seat. As they
drove along he shuddered and exclaimed several times so audibly that the
coachman asked him:
"What is your pleasure?"
"Where are you going?" shouted Pierre to the man, who was driving to
Lubyanka Street.
"To the Governor's, as you ordered," answered the coachman.
"Fool! Idiot!" shouted Pierre, abusing his coachman—a thing he rarely did.
"Home, I told you! And drive faster, blockhead!" "I must get away this very
day," he murmured to himself.
At the sight of the tortured Frenchman and the crowd surrounding the Lobnoe
Place, Pierre had so definitely made up his mind that he could no longer
remain in Moscow and would leave for the army that very day that it seemed
to him that either he had told the coachman this or that the man ought to have
known it for himself.
On reaching home Pierre gave orders to Evstafey—his head coachman who
knew everything, could do anything, and was known to all Moscow—that he
would leave that night for the army at Mozhaysk, and that his saddle horses
should be sent there. This could not all be arranged that day, so on Evstafey's
representation Pierre had to put off his departure till next day to allow time for
the relay horses to be sent on in advance.
On the twenty-fourth the weather cleared up after a spell of rain, and after
dinner Pierre left Moscow. When changing horses that night in Perkhushkovo,
he learned that there had been a great battle that evening. (This was the battle
of Shevardino.) He was told that there in Perkhushkovo the earth trembled
from the firing, but nobody could answer his questions as to who had won. At
dawn next day Pierre was approaching Mozhaysk.
Every house in Mozhaysk had soldiers quartered in it, and at the hostel where
Pierre was met by his groom and coachman there was no room to be had. It
was full of officers.
Everywhere in Mozhaysk and beyond it, troops were stationed or on the
march. Cossacks, foot and horse soldiers, wagons, caissons, and cannon were
everywhere. Pierre pushed forward as fast as he could, and the farther he left
Moscow behind and the deeper he plunged into that sea of troops the more
was he overcome by restless agitation and a new and joyful feeling he had not
experienced before. It was a feeling akin to what he had felt at the Sloboda
Palace during the Emperor's visit—a sense of the necessity of undertaking
something and sacrificing something. He now experienced a glad
consciousness that everything that constitutes men's happiness—the comforts
of life, wealth, even life itself—is rubbish it is pleasant to throw away,
compared with something... With what? Pierre could not say, and he did not
try to determine for whom and for what he felt such particular delight in
sacrificing everything. He was not occupied with the question of what to
sacrifice for; the fact of sacrificing in itself afforded him a new and joyous
sensation.
CHAPTER XIX
On the twenty-fourth of August the battle of the Shevardino Redoubt was
fought, on the twenty-fifth not a shot was fired by either side, and on the
twenty-sixth the battle of Borodino itself took place.
Why and how were the battles of Shevardino and Borodino given and
accepted? Why was the battle of Borodino fought? There was not the least
sense in it for either the French or the Russians. Its immediate result for the
Russians was, and was bound to be, that we were brought nearer to the
destruction of Moscow—which we feared more than anything in the world;
and for the French its immediate result was that they were brought nearer to
the destruction of their whole army—which they feared more than anything in
the world. What the result must be was quite obvious, and yet Napoleon
offered and Kutuzov accepted that battle.
If the commanders had been guided by reason, it would seem that it must have
been obvious to Napoleon that by advancing thirteen hundred miles and giving
battle with a probability of losing a quarter of his army, he was advancing to
certain destruction, and it must have been equally clear to Kutuzov that by
accepting battle and risking the loss of a quarter of his army he would
certainly lose Moscow. For Kutuzov this was mathematically clear, as it is that
if when playing draughts I have one man less and go on exchanging, I shall
certainly lose, and therefore should not exchange. When my opponent has
sixteen men and I have fourteen, I am only one eighth weaker than he, but
when I have exchanged thirteen more men he will be three times as strong as I
am.
Before the battle of Borodino our strength in proportion to the French was
about as five to six, but after that battle it was little more than one to two:
previously we had a hundred thousand against a hundred and twenty thousand;
afterwards little more than fifty thousand against a hundred thousand. Yet the
shrewd and experienced Kutuzov accepted the battle, while Napoleon, who
was said to be a commander of genius, gave it, losing a quarter of his army
and lengthening his lines of communication still more. If it is said that he
expected to end the campaign by occupying Moscow as he had ended a
previous campaign by occupying Vienna, there is much evidence to the
contrary. Napoleon's historians themselves tell us that from Smolensk onwards
he wished to stop, knew the danger of his extended position, and knew that the
occupation of Moscow would not be the end of the campaign, for he had seen
at Smolensk the state in which Russian towns were left to him, and had not
received a single reply to his repeated announcements of his wish to negotiate.
In giving and accepting battle at Borodino, Kutuzov acted involuntarily and
irrationally. But later on, to fit what had occurred, the historians provided
cunningly devised evidence of the foresight and genius of the generals who, of
all the blind tools of history were the most enslaved and involuntary.
The ancients have left us model heroic poems in which the heroes furnish the
whole interest of the story, and we are still unable to accustom ourselves to the
fact that for our epoch histories of that kind are meaningless.
On the other question, how the battle of Borodino and the preceding battle of
Shevardino were fought, there also exists a definite and well-known, but quite
false, conception. All the historians describe the affair as follows:
The Russian army, they say, in its retreat from Smolensk sought out for itself
the best position for a general engagement and found such a position at
Borodino.
The Russians, they say, fortified this position in advance on the left of the
highroad (from Moscow to Smolensk) and almost at a right angle to it, from
Borodino to Utitsa, at the very place where the battle was fought.
In front of this position, they say, a fortified outpost was set up on the
Shevardino mound to observe the enemy. On the twenty-fourth, we are told,
Napoleon attacked this advanced post and took it, and, on the twenty-sixth,
attacked the whole Russian army, which was in position on the field of
Borodino.
So the histories say, and it is all quite wrong, as anyone who cares to look into
the matter can easily convince himself.
The Russians did not seek out the best position but, on the contrary, during the
retreat passed many positions better than Borodino. They did not stop at any
one of these positions because Kutuzov did not wish to occupy a position he
had not himself chosen, because the popular demand for a battle had not yet
expressed itself strongly enough, and because Miloradovich had not yet
arrived with the militia, and for many other reasons. The fact is that other
positions they had passed were stronger, and that the position at Borodino (the
one where the battle was fought), far from being strong, was no more a
position than any other spot one might find in the Russian Empire by sticking
a pin into the map at hazard.
Not only did the Russians not fortify the position on the field of Borodino to
the left of, and at a right angle to, the highroad (that is, the position on which
the battle took place), but never till the twenty-fifth of August, 1812, did they
think that a battle might be fought there. This was shown first by the fact that
there were no entrenchments there by the twenty fifth and that those begun on
the twenty-fifth and twenty-sixth were not completed, and secondly, by the
position of the Shevardino Redoubt. That redoubt was quite senseless in front
of the position where the battle was accepted. Why was it more strongly
fortified than any other post? And why were all efforts exhausted and six
thousand men sacrificed to defend it till late at night on the twenty-fourth? A
Cossack patrol would have sufficed to observe the enemy. Thirdly, as proof
that the position on which the battle was fought had not been foreseen and that
the Shevardino Redoubt was not an advanced post of that position, we have
the fact that up to the twenty-fifth, Barclay de Tolly and Bagration were
convinced that the Shevardino Redoubt was the left flank of the position, and
that Kutuzov himself in his report, written in hot haste after the battle, speaks
of the Shevardino Redoubt as the left flank of the position. It was much later,
when reports on the battle of Borodino were written at leisure, that the
incorrect and extraordinary statement was invented (probably to justify the
mistakes of a commander-in-chief who had to be represented as infallible) that
the Shevardino Redoubt was an advanced post—whereas in reality it was
simply a fortified point on the left flank—and that the battle of Borodino was
fought by us on an entrenched position previously selected, where as it was
fought on a quite unexpected spot which was almost unentrenched.
The case was evidently this: a position was selected along the river Kolocha—
which crosses the highroad not at a right angle but at an acute angle—so that
the left flank was at Shevardino, the right flank near the village of Novoe, and
the center at Borodino at the confluence of the rivers Kolocha and Voyna.
To anyone who looks at the field of Borodino without thinking of how the
battle was actually fought, this position, protected by the river Kolocha,
presents itself as obvious for an army whose object was to prevent an enemy
from advancing along the Smolensk road to Moscow.
Napoleon, riding to Valuevo on the twenty-fourth, did not see (as the history
books say he did) the position of the Russians from Utitsa to Borodino (he
could not have seen that position because it did not exist), nor did he see an
advanced post of the Russian army, but while pursuing the Russian rearguard
he came upon the left flank of the Russian position—at the Shevardino
Redoubt—and unexpectedly for the Russians moved his army across the
Kolocha. And the Russians, not having time to begin a general engagement,
withdrew their left wing from the position they had intended to occupy and
took up a new position which had not been foreseen and was not fortified. By
crossing to the other side of the Kolocha to the left of the highroad, Napoleon
shifted the whole forthcoming battle from right to left (looking from the
Russian side) and transferred it to the plain between Utitsa, Semenovsk, and
Borodino—a plain no more advantageous as a position than any other plain in
Russia—and there the whole battle of the twenty-sixth of August took place.
Had Napoleon not ridden out on the evening of the twenty-fourth to the
Kolocha, and had he not then ordered an immediate attack on the redoubt but
had begun the attack next morning, no one would have doubted that the
Shevardino Redoubt was the left flank of our position, and the battle would
have taken place where we expected it. In that case we should probably have
defended the Shevardino Redoubt—our left flank—still more obstinately. We
should have attacked Napoleon in the center or on the right, and the
engagement would have taken place on the twenty-fifth, in the position we
intended and had fortified. But as the attack on our left flank took place in the
evening after the retreat of our rear guard (that is, immediately after the fight
at Gridneva), and as the Russian commanders did not wish, or were not in
time, to begin a general engagement then on the evening of the twenty-fourth,
the first and chief action of the battle of Borodino was already lost on the
twenty-fourth, and obviously led to the loss of the one fought on the twentysixth.
After the loss of the Shevardino Redoubt, we found ourselves on the morning
of the twenty-fifth without a position for our left flank, and were forced to
bend it back and hastily entrench it where it chanced to be.
Not only was the Russian army on the twenty-sixth defended by weak,
unfinished entrenchments, but the disadvantage of that position was increased
by the fact that the Russian commanders—not having fully realized what had
happened, namely the loss of our position on the left flank and the shifting of
the whole field of the forthcoming battle from right to left—maintained their
extended position from the village of Novoe to Utitsa, and consequently had to
move their forces from right to left during the battle. So it happened that
throughout the whole battle the Russians opposed the entire French army
launched against our left flank with but half as many men. (Poniatowski's
action against Utitsa, and Uvarov's on the right flank against the French, were
actions distinct from the main course of the battle.) So the battle of Borodino
did not take place at all as (in an effort to conceal our commanders' mistakes
even at the cost of diminishing the glory due to the Russian army and people)
it has been described. The battle of Borodino was not fought on a chosen and
entrenched position with forces only slightly weaker than those of the enemy,
but, as a result of the loss of the Shevardino Redoubt, the Russians fought the
battle of Borodino on an open and almost unentrenched position, with forces
only half as numerous as the French; that is to say, under conditions in which
it was not merely unthinkable to fight for ten hours and secure an indecisive
result, but unthinkable to keep an army even from complete disintegration and
flight.
CHAPTER XX
On the morning of the twenty-fifth Pierre was leaving Mozhaysk. At the
descent of the high steep hill, down which a winding road led out of the town
past the cathedral on the right, where a service was being held and the bells
were ringing, Pierre got out of his vehicle and proceeded on foot. Behind him
a cavalry regiment was coming down the hill preceded by its singers. Coming
up toward him was a train of carts carrying men who had been wounded in the
engagement the day before. The peasant drivers, shouting and lashing their
horses, kept crossing from side to side. The carts, in each of which three or
four wounded soldiers were lying or sitting, jolted over the stones that had
been thrown on the steep incline to make it something like a road. The
wounded, bandaged with rags, with pale cheeks, compressed lips, and knitted
brows, held on to the sides of the carts as they were jolted against one another.
Almost all of them stared with naive, childlike curiosity at Pierre's white hat
and green swallow-tail coat.
Pierre's coachman shouted angrily at the convoy of wounded to keep to one
side of the road. The cavalry regiment, as it descended the hill with its singers,
surrounded Pierre's carriage and blocked the road. Pierre stopped, being
pressed against the side of the cutting in which the road ran. The sunshine
from behind the hill did not penetrate into the cutting and there it was cold and
damp, but above Pierre's head was the bright August sunshine and the bells
sounded merrily. One of the carts with wounded stopped by the side of the
road close to Pierre. The driver in his bast shoes ran panting up to it, placed a
stone under one of its tireless hind wheels, and began arranging the breechband on his little horse.
One of the wounded, an old soldier with a bandaged arm who was following
the cart on foot, caught hold of it with his sound hand and turned to look at
Pierre.
"I say, fellow countryman! Will they set us down here or take us on to
Moscow?" he asked.
Pierre was so deep in thought that he did not hear the question. He was
looking now at the cavalry regiment that had met the convoy of wounded, now
at the cart by which he was standing, in which two wounded men were sitting
and one was lying. One of those sitting up in the cart had probably been
wounded in the cheek. His whole head was wrapped in rags and one cheek
was swollen to the size of a baby's head. His nose and mouth were twisted to
one side. This soldier was looking at the cathedral and crossing himself.
Another, a young lad, a fair-haired recruit as white as though there was no
blood in his thin face, looked at Pierre kindly, with a fixed smile. The third lay
prone so that his face was not visible. The cavalry singers were passing close
by:
Ah lost, quite lost... is my head so keen,
Living in a foreign land.
they sang their soldiers' dance song.
As if responding to them but with a different sort of merriment, the metallic
sound of the bells reverberated high above and the hot rays of the sun bathed
the top of the opposite slope with yet another sort of merriment. But beneath
the slope, by the cart with the wounded near the panting little nag where Pierre
stood, it was damp, somber, and sad.
The soldier with the swollen cheek looked angrily at the cavalry singers.
"Oh, the coxcombs!" he muttered reproachfully.
"It's not the soldiers only, but I've seen peasants today, too.... The peasants—
even they have to go," said the soldier behind the cart, addressing Pierre with a
sad smile. "No distinctions made nowadays.... They want the whole nation to
fall on them—in a word, it's Moscow! They want to make an end of it."
In spite of the obscurity of the soldier's words Pierre understood what he
wanted to say and nodded approval.
The road was clear again; Pierre descended the hill and drove on.
He kept looking to either side of the road for familiar faces, but only saw
everywhere the unfamiliar faces of various military men of different branches
of the service, who all looked with astonishment at his white hat and green tail
coat.
Having gone nearly three miles he at last met an acquaintance and eagerly
addressed him. This was one of the head army doctors. He was driving toward
Pierre in a covered gig, sitting beside a young surgeon, and on recognizing
Pierre he told the Cossack who occupied the driver's seat to pull up.
"Count! Your excellency, how come you to be here?" asked the doctor.
"Well, you know, I wanted to see..."
"Yes, yes, there will be something to see...."
Pierre got out and talked to the doctor, explaining his intention of taking part
in a battle.
The doctor advised him to apply direct to Kutuzov.
"Why should you be God knows where out of sight, during the battle?" he
said, exchanging glances with his young companion. "Anyhow his Serene
Highness knows you and will receive you graciously. That's what you must
do."
The doctor seemed tired and in a hurry.
"You think so?... Ah, I also wanted to ask you where our position is exactly?"
said Pierre.
"The position?" repeated the doctor. "Well, that's not my line. Drive past
Tatarinova, a lot of digging is going on there. Go up the hillock and you'll
see."
"Can one see from there?... If you would..."
But the doctor interrupted him and moved toward his gig.
"I would go with you but on my honor I'm up to here"—and he pointed to his
throat. "I'm galloping to the commander of the corps. How do matters stand?...
You know, Count, there'll be a battle tomorrow. Out of an army of a hundred
thousand we must expect at least twenty thousand wounded, and we haven't
stretchers, or bunks, or dressers, or doctors enough for six thousand. We have
ten thousand carts, but we need other things as well—we must manage as best
we can!"
The strange thought that of the thousands of men, young and old, who had
stared with merry surprise at his hat (perhaps the very men he had noticed),
twenty thousand were inevitably doomed to wounds and death amazed Pierre.
"They may die tomorrow; why are they thinking of anything but death?" And
by some latent sequence of thought the descent of the Mozhaysk hill, the carts
with the wounded, the ringing bells, the slanting rays of the sun, and the songs
of the cavalrymen vividly recurred to his mind.
"The cavalry ride to battle and meet the wounded and do not for a moment
think of what awaits them, but pass by, winking at the wounded. Yet from
among these men twenty thousand are doomed to die, and they wonder at my
hat! Strange!" thought Pierre, continuing his way to Tatarinova.
In front of a landowner's house to the left of the road stood carriages, wagons,
and crowds of orderlies and sentinels. The commander-in-chief was putting up
there, but just when Pierre arrived he was not in and hardly any of the staff
were there—they had gone to the church service. Pierre drove on toward
Gorki.
When he had ascended the hill and reached the little village street, he saw for
the first time peasant militiamen in their white shirts and with crosses on their
caps, who, talking and laughing loudly, animated and perspiring, were at work
on a huge knoll overgrown with grass to the right of the road.
Some of them were digging, others were wheeling barrowloads of earth along
planks, while others stood about doing nothing.
Two officers were standing on the knoll, directing the men. On seeing these
peasants, who were evidently still amused by the novelty of their position as
soldiers, Pierre once more thought of the wounded men at Mozhaysk and
understood what the soldier had meant when he said: "They want the whole
nation to fall on them." The sight of these bearded peasants at work on the
battlefield, with their queer, clumsy boots and perspiring necks, and their
shirts opening from the left toward the middle, unfastened, exposing their
sunburned collarbones, impressed Pierre more strongly with the solemnity and
importance of the moment than anything he had yet seen or heard.
CHAPTER XXI
Pierre stepped out of his carriage and, passing the toiling militiamen, ascended
the knoll from which, according to the doctor, the battlefield could be seen.
It was about eleven o'clock. The sun shone somewhat to the left and behind
him and brightly lit up the enormous panorama which, rising like an
amphitheater, extended before him in the clear rarefied atmosphere.
From above on the left, bisecting that amphitheater, wound the Smolensk
highroad, passing through a village with a white church some five hundred
paces in front of the knoll and below it. This was Borodino. Below the village
the road crossed the river by a bridge and, winding down and up, rose higher
and higher to the village of Valuevo visible about four miles away, where
Napoleon was then stationed. Beyond Valuevo the road disappeared into a
yellowing forest on the horizon. Far in the distance in that birch and fir forest
to the right of the road, the cross and belfry of the Kolocha Monastery
gleamed in the sun. Here and there over the whole of that blue expanse, to
right and left of the forest and the road, smoking campfires could be seen and
indefinite masses of troops—ours and the enemy's. The ground to the right—
along the course of the Kolocha and Moskva rivers—was broken and hilly.
Between the hollows the villages of Bezubova and Zakharino showed in the
distance. On the left the ground was more level; there were fields of grain, and
the smoking ruins of Semenovsk, which had been burned down, could be seen.
All that Pierre saw was so indefinite that neither the left nor the right side of
the field fully satisfied his expectations. Nowhere could he see the battlefield
he had expected to find, but only fields, meadows, troops, woods, the smoke
of campfires, villages, mounds, and streams; and try as he would he could
descry no military "position" in this place which teemed with life, nor could he
even distinguish our troops from the enemy's.
"I must ask someone who knows," he thought, and addressed an officer who
was looking with curiosity at his huge unmilitary figure.
"May I ask you," said Pierre, "what village that is in front?"
"Burdino, isn't it?" said the officer, turning to his companion.
"Borodino," the other corrected him.
The officer, evidently glad of an opportunity for a talk, moved up to Pierre.
"Are those our men there?" Pierre inquired.
"Yes, and there, further on, are the French," said the officer. "There they are,
there... you can see them."
"Where? Where?" asked Pierre.
"One can see them with the naked eye... Why, there!"
The officer pointed with his hand to the smoke visible on the left beyond the
river, and the same stern and serious expression that Pierre had noticed on
many of the faces he had met came into his face.
"Ah, those are the French! And over there?..." Pierre pointed to a knoll on the
left, near which some troops could be seen.
"Those are ours."
"Ah, ours! And there?..." Pierre pointed to another knoll in the distance with a
big tree on it, near a village that lay in a hollow where also some campfires
were smoking and something black was visible.
"That's his again," said the officer. (It was the Shevardino Redoubt.) "It was
ours yesterday, but now it is his."
"Then how about our position?"
"Our position?" replied the officer with a smile of satisfaction. "I can tell you
quite clearly, because I constructed nearly all our entrenchments. There, you
see? There's our center, at Borodino, just there," and he pointed to the village
in front of them with the white church. "That's where one crosses the Kolocha.
You see down there where the rows of hay are lying in the hollow, there's the
bridge. That's our center. Our right flank is over there"—he pointed sharply to
the right, far away in the broken ground—"That's where the Moskva River is,
and we have thrown up three redoubts there, very strong ones. The left
flank..." here the officer paused. "Well, you see, that's difficult to explain....
Yesterday our left flank was there at Shevardino, you see, where the oak is, but
now we have withdrawn our left wing—now it is over there, do you see that
village and the smoke? That's Semenovsk, yes, there," he pointed to Raevski's
knoll. "But the battle will hardly be there. His having moved his troops there is
only a ruse; he will probably pass round to the right of the Moskva. But
wherever it may be, many a man will be missing tomorrow!" he remarked.
An elderly sergeant who had approached the officer while he was giving these
explanations had waited in silence for him to finish speaking, but at this point,
evidently not liking the officer's remark, interrupted him.
"Gabions must be sent for," said he sternly.
The officer appeared abashed, as though he understood that one might think of
how many men would be missing tomorrow but ought not to speak of it.
"Well, send number three company again," the officer replied hurriedly.
"And you, are you one of the doctors?"
"No, I've come on my own," answered Pierre, and he went down the hill again,
passing the militiamen.
"Oh, those damned fellows!" muttered the officer who followed him, holding
his nose as he ran past the men at work.
"There they are... bringing her, coming... There they are... They'll be here in a
minute..." voices were suddenly heard saying; and officers, soldiers, and
militiamen began running forward along the road.
A church procession was coming up the hill from Borodino. First along the
dusty road came the infantry in ranks, bareheaded and with arms reversed.
From behind them came the sound of church singing.
Soldiers and militiamen ran bareheaded past Pierre toward the procession.
"They are bringing her, our Protectress!... The Iberian Mother of God!"
someone cried.
"The Smolensk Mother of God," another corrected him.
The militiamen, both those who had been in the village and those who had
been at work on the battery, threw down their spades and ran to meet the
church procession. Following the battalion that marched along the dusty road
came priests in their vestments—one little old man in a hood with attendants
and singers. Behind them soldiers and officers bore a large, dark-faced icon
with an embossed metal cover. This was the icon that had been brought from
Smolensk and had since accompanied the army. Behind, before, and on both
sides, crowds of militiamen with bared heads walked, ran, and bowed to the
ground.
At the summit of the hill they stopped with the icon; the men who had been
holding it up by the linen bands attached to it were relieved by others, the
chanters relit their censers, and service began. The hot rays of the sun beat
down vertically and a fresh soft wind played with the hair of the bared heads
and with the ribbons decorating the icon. The singing did not sound loud under
the open sky. An immense crowd of bareheaded officers, soldiers, and
militiamen surrounded the icon. Behind the priest and a chanter stood the
notabilities on a spot reserved for them. A bald general with a St. George's
Cross on his neck stood just behind the priest's back, and without crossing
himself (he was evidently a German) patiently awaited the end of the service,
which he considered it necessary to hear to the end, probably to arouse the
patriotism of the Russian people. Another general stood in a martial pose,
crossing himself by shaking his hand in front of his chest while looking about
him. Standing among the crowd of peasants, Pierre recognized several
acquaintances among these notables, but did not look at them—his whole
attention was absorbed in watching the serious expression on the faces of the
crowd of soldiers and militiamen who were all gazing eagerly at the icon. As
soon as the tired chanters, who were singing the service for the twentieth time
that day, began lazily and mechanically to sing: "Save from calamity Thy
servants, O Mother of God," and the priest and deacon chimed in: "For to
Thee under God we all flee as to an inviolable bulwark and protection," there
again kindled in all those faces the same expression of consciousness of the
solemnity of the impending moment that Pierre had seen on the faces at the
foot of the hill at Mozhaysk and momentarily on many and many faces he had
met that morning; and heads were bowed more frequently and hair tossed
back, and sighs and the sound men made as they crossed themselves were
heard.
The crowd round the icon suddenly parted and pressed against Pierre.
Someone, a very important personage judging by the haste with which way
was made for him, was approaching the icon.
It was Kutuzov, who had been riding round the position and on his way back
to Tatarinova had stopped where the service was being held. Pierre recognized
him at once by his peculiar figure, which distinguished him from everybody
else.
With a long overcoat on his exceedingly stout, round-shouldered body, with
uncovered white head and puffy face showing the white ball of the eye he had
lost, Kutuzov walked with plunging, swaying gait into the crowd and stopped
behind the priest. He crossed himself with an accustomed movement, bent till
he touched the ground with his hand, and bowed his white head with a deep
sigh. Behind Kutuzov was Bennigsen and the suite. Despite the presence of
the commander-in-chief, who attracted the attention of all the superior
officers, the militiamen and soldiers continued their prayers without looking at
him.
When the service was over, Kutuzov stepped up to the icon, sank heavily to
his knees, bowed to the ground, and for a long time tried vainly to rise, but
could not do so on account of his weakness and weight. His white head
twitched with the effort. At last he rose, kissed the icon as a child does with
naively pouting lips, and again bowed till he touched the ground with his
hand. The other generals followed his example, then the officers, and after
them with excited faces, pressing on one another, crowding, panting, and
pushing, scrambled the soldiers and militiamen.
CHAPTER XXII
Staggering amid the crush, Pierre looked about him.
"Count Peter Kirilovich! How did you get here?" said a voice.
Pierre looked round. Boris Drubetskoy, brushing his knees with his hand (he
had probably soiled them when he, too, had knelt before the icon), came up to
him smiling. Boris was elegantly dressed, with a slightly martial touch
appropriate to a campaign. He wore a long coat and like Kutuzov had a whip
slung across his shoulder.
Meanwhile Kutuzov had reached the village and seated himself in the shade of
the nearest house, on a bench which one Cossack had run to fetch and another
had hastily covered with a rug. An immense and brilliant suite surrounded
him.
The icon was carried further, accompanied by the throng. Pierre stopped some
thirty paces from Kutuzov, talking to Boris.
He explained his wish to be present at the battle and to see the position.
"This is what you must do," said Boris. "I will do the honors of the camp to
you. You will see everything best from where Count Bennigsen will be. I am
in attendance on him, you know; I'll mention it to him. But if you want to ride
round the position, come along with us. We are just going to the left flank.
Then when we get back, do spend the night with me and we'll arrange a game
of cards. Of course you know Dmitri Sergeevich? Those are his quarters," and
he pointed to the third house in the village of Gorki.
"But I should like to see the right flank. They say it's very strong," said Pierre.
"I should like to start from the Moskva River and ride round the whole
position."
"Well, you can do that later, but the chief thing is the left flank."
"Yes, yes. But where is Prince Bolkonski's regiment? Can you point it out to
me?"
"Prince Andrew's? We shall pass it and I'll take you to him."
"What about the left flank?" asked Pierre
"To tell you the truth, between ourselves, God only knows what state our left
flank is in," said Boris confidentially lowering his voice. "It is not at all what
Count Bennigsen intended. He meant to fortify that knoll quite differently,
but..." Boris shrugged his shoulders, "his Serene Highness would not have it,
or someone persuaded him. You see..." but Boris did not finish, for at that
moment Kaysarov, Kutuzov's adjutant, came up to Pierre. "Ah, Kaysarov!"
said Boris, addressing him with an unembarrassed smile, "I was just trying to
explain our position to the count. It is amazing how his Serene Highness could
so foresee the intentions of the French!"
"You mean the left flank?" asked Kaysarov.
"Yes, exactly; the left flank is now extremely strong."
Though Kutuzov had dismissed all unnecessary men from the staff, Boris had
contrived to remain at headquarters after the changes. He had established
himself with Count Bennigsen, who, like all on whom Boris had been in
attendance, considered young Prince Drubetskoy an invaluable man.
In the higher command there were two sharply defined parties: Kutuzov's
party and that of Bennigsen, the chief of staff. Boris belonged to the latter and
no one else, while showing servile respect to Kutuzov, could so create an
impression that the old fellow was not much good and that Bennigsen
managed everything. Now the decisive moment of battle had come when
Kutuzov would be destroyed and the power pass to Bennigsen, or even if
Kutuzov won the battle it would be felt that everything was done by
Bennigsen. In any case many great rewards would have to be given for
tomorrow's action, and new men would come to the front. So Boris was full of
nervous vivacity all day.
After Kaysarov, others whom Pierre knew came up to him, and he had not
time to reply to all the questions about Moscow that were showered upon him,
or to listen to all that was told him. The faces all expressed animation and
apprehension, but it seemed to Pierre that the cause of the excitement shown in
some of these faces lay chiefly in questions of personal success; his mind,
however, was occupied by the different expression he saw on other faces—an
expression that spoke not of personal matters but of the universal questions of
life and death. Kutuzov noticed Pierre's figure and the group gathered round
him.
"Call him to me," said Kutuzov.
An adjutant told Pierre of his Serene Highness' wish, and Pierre went toward
Kutuzov's bench. But a militiaman got there before him. It was Dolokhov.
"How did that fellow get here?" asked Pierre.
"He's a creature that wriggles in anywhere!" was the answer. "He has been
degraded, you know. Now he wants to bob up again. He's been proposing
some scheme or other and has crawled into the enemy's picket line at night....
He's a brave fellow."
Pierre took off his hat and bowed respectfully to Kutuzov.
"I concluded that if I reported to your Serene Highness you might send me
away or say that you knew what I was reporting, but then I shouldn't lose
anything..." Dolokhov was saying.
"Yes, yes."
"But if I were right, I should be rendering a service to my Fatherland for
which I am ready to die."
"Yes, yes."
"And should your Serene Highness require a man who will not spare his skin,
please think of me.... Perhaps I may prove useful to your Serene Highness."
"Yes... Yes..." Kutuzov repeated, his laughing eye narrowing more and more as
he looked at Pierre.
Just then Boris, with his courtierlike adroitness, stepped up to Pierre's side
near Kutuzov and in a most natural manner, without raising his voice, said to
Pierre, as though continuing an interrupted conversation:
"The militia have put on clean white shirts to be ready to die. What heroism,
Count!"
Boris evidently said this to Pierre in order to be overheard by his Serene
Highness. He knew Kutuzov's attention would be caught by those words, and
so it was.
"What are you saying about the militia?" he asked Boris.
"Preparing for tomorrow, your Serene Highness—for death—they have put on
clean shirts."
"Ah... a wonderful, a matchless people!" said Kutuzov; and he closed his eyes
and swayed his head. "A matchless people!" he repeated with a sigh.
"So you want to smell gunpowder?" he said to Pierre. "Yes, it's a pleasant
smell. I have the honor to be one of your wife's adorers. Is she well? My
quarters are at your service."
And as often happens with old people, Kutuzov began looking about absentmindedly as if forgetting all he wanted to say or do.
Then, evidently remembering what he wanted, he beckoned to Andrew
Kaysarov, his adjutant's brother.
"Those verses... those verses of Marin's... how do they go, eh? Those he wrote
about Gerakov: 'Lectures for the corps inditing'... Recite them, recite them!"
said he, evidently preparing to laugh.
Kaysarov recited.... Kutuzov smilingly nodded his head to the rhythm of the
verses.
When Pierre had left Kutuzov, Dolokhov came up to him and took his hand.
"I am very glad to meet you here, Count," he said aloud, regardless of the
presence of strangers and in a particularly resolute and solemn tone. "On the
eve of a day when God alone knows who of us is fated to survive, I am glad of
this opportunity to tell you that I regret the misunderstandings that occurred
between us and should wish you not to have any ill feeling for me. I beg you
to forgive me."
Pierre looked at Dolokhov with a smile, not knowing what to say to him. With
tears in his eyes Dolokhov embraced Pierre and kissed him.
Boris said a few words to his general, and Count Bennigsen turned to Pierre
and proposed that he should ride with him along the line.
"It will interest you," said he.
"Yes, very much," replied Pierre.
Half an hour later Kutuzov left for Tatarinova, and Bennigsen and his suite,
with Pierre among them, set out on their ride along the line.
CHAPTER XXIII
From Gorki, Bennigsen descended the highroad to the bridge which, when
they had looked at it from the hill, the officer had pointed out as being the
center of our position and where rows of fragrant new-mown hay lay by the
riverside. They rode across that bridge into the village of Borodino and thence
turned to the left, passing an enormous number of troops and guns, and came
to a high knoll where militiamen were digging. This was the redoubt, as yet
unnamed, which afterwards became known as the Raevski Redoubt, or the
Knoll Battery, but Pierre paid no special attention to it. He did not know that it
would become more memorable to him than any other spot on the plain of
Borodino.
They then crossed the hollow to Semenovsk, where the soldiers were dragging
away the last logs from the huts and barns. Then they rode downhill and
uphill, across a ryefield trodden and beaten down as if by hail, following a
track freshly made by the artillery over the furrows of the plowed land, and
reached some fleches * which were still being dug.
* A kind of entrenchment.
At the fleches Bennigsen stopped and began looking at the Shevardino
Redoubt opposite, which had been ours the day before and where several
horsemen could be descried. The officers said that either Napoleon or Murat
was there, and they all gazed eagerly at this little group of horsemen. Pierre
also looked at them, trying to guess which of the scarcely discernible figures
was Napoleon. At last those mounted men rode away from the mound and
disappeared.
Bennigsen spoke to a general who approached him, and began explaining the
whole position of our troops. Pierre listened to him, straining each faculty to
understand the essential points of the impending battle, but was mortified to
feel that his mental capacity was inadequate for the task. He could make
nothing of it. Bennigsen stopped speaking and, noticing that Pierre was
listening, suddenly said to him:
"I don't think this interests you?"
"On the contrary it's very interesting!" replied Pierre not quite truthfully.
From the fleches they rode still farther to the left, along a road winding
through a thick, low-growing birch wood. In the middle of the wood a brown
hare with white feet sprang out and, scared by the tramp of the many horses,
grew so confused that it leaped along the road in front of them for some time,
arousing general attention and laughter, and only when several voices shouted
at it did it dart to one side and disappear in the thicket. After going through the
wood for about a mile and a half they came out on a glade where troops of
Tuchkov's corps were stationed to defend the left flank.
Here, at the extreme left flank, Bennigsen talked a great deal and with much
heat, and, as it seemed to Pierre, gave orders of great military importance. In
front of Tuchkov's troops was some high ground not occupied by troops.
Bennigsen loudly criticized this mistake, saying that it was madness to leave a
height which commanded the country around unoccupied and to place troops
below it. Some of the generals expressed the same opinion. One in particular
declared with martial heat that they were put there to be slaughtered.
Bennigsen on his own authority ordered the troops to occupy the high ground.
This disposition on the left flank increased Pierre's doubt of his own capacity
to understand military matters. Listening to Bennigsen and the generals
criticizing the position of the troops behind the hill, he quite understood them
and shared their opinion, but for that very reason he could not understand how
the man who put them there behind the hill could have made so gross and
palpable a blunder.
Pierre did not know that these troops were not, as Bennigsen supposed, put
there to defend the position, but were in a concealed position as an ambush,
that they should not be seen and might be able to strike an approaching enemy
unexpectedly. Bennigsen did not know this and moved the troops forward
according to his own ideas without mentioning the matter to the commanderin-chief.
CHAPTER XXIV
On that bright evening of August 25, Prince Andrew lay leaning on his elbow
in a broken-down shed in the village of Knyazkovo at the further end of his
regiment's encampment. Through a gap in the broken wall he could see, beside
the wooden fence, a row of thirty year-old birches with their lower branches
lopped off, a field on which shocks of oats were standing, and some bushes
near which rose the smoke of campfires—the soldiers' kitchens.
Narrow and burdensome and useless to anyone as his life now seemed to him,
Prince Andrew on the eve of battle felt agitated and irritable as he had done
seven years before at Austerlitz.
He had received and given the orders for next day's battle and had nothing
more to do. But his thoughts—the simplest, clearest, and therefore most
terrible thoughts—would give him no peace. He knew that tomorrow's battle
would be the most terrible of all he had taken part in, and for the first time in
his life the possibility of death presented itself to him—not in relation to any
worldly matter or with reference to its effect on others, but simply in relation
to himself, to his own soul—vividly, plainly, terribly, and almost as a certainty.
And from the height of this perception all that had previously tormented and
preoccupied him suddenly became illumined by a cold white light without
shadows, without perspective, without distinction of outline. All life appeared
to him like magic-lantern pictures at which he had long been gazing by
artificial light through a glass. Now he suddenly saw those badly daubed
pictures in clear daylight and without a glass. "Yes, yes! There they are, those
false images that agitated, enraptured, and tormented me," said he to himself,
passing in review the principal pictures of the magic lantern of life and
regarding them now in the cold white daylight of his clear perception of death.
"There they are, those rudely painted figures that once seemed splendid and
mysterious. Glory, the good of society, love of a woman, the Fatherland itself
—how important these pictures appeared to me, with what profound meaning
they seemed to be filled! And it is all so simple, pale, and crude in the cold
white light of this morning which I feel is dawning for me." The three great
sorrows of his life held his attention in particular: his love for a woman, his
father's death, and the French invasion which had overrun half Russia. "Love...
that little girl who seemed to me brimming over with mystic forces! Yes,
indeed, I loved her. I made romantic plans of love and happiness with her! Oh,
what a boy I was!" he said aloud bitterly. "Ah me! I believed in some ideal
love which was to keep her faithful to me for the whole year of my absence!
Like the gentle dove in the fable she was to pine apart from me.... But it was
much simpler really.... It was all very simple and horrible."
"When my father built Bald Hills he thought the place was his: his land, his
air, his peasants. But Napoleon came and swept him aside, unconscious of his
existence, as he might brush a chip from his path, and his Bald Hills and his
whole life fell to pieces. Princess Mary says it is a trial sent from above. What
is the trial for, when he is not here and will never return? He is not here! For
whom then is the trial intended? The Fatherland, the destruction of Moscow!
And tomorrow I shall be killed, perhaps not even by a Frenchman but by one
of our own men, by a soldier discharging a musket close to my ear as one of
them did yesterday, and the French will come and take me by head and heels
and fling me into a hole that I may not stink under their noses, and new
conditions of life will arise, which will seem quite ordinary to others and about
which I shall know nothing. I shall not exist..."
He looked at the row of birches shining in the sunshine, with their motionless
green and yellow foliage and white bark. "To die... to be killed tomorrow...
That I should not exist... That all this should still be, but no me...."
And the birches with their light and shade, the curly clouds, the smoke of the
campfires, and all that was around him changed and seemed terrible and
menacing. A cold shiver ran down his spine. He rose quickly, went out of the
shed, and began to walk about.
After he had returned, voices were heard outside the shed. "Who's that?" he
cried.
The red-nosed Captain Timokhin, formerly Dolokhov's squadron commander,
but now from lack of officers a battalion commander, shyly entered the shed
followed by an adjutant and the regimental paymaster.
Prince Andrew rose hastily, listened to the business they had come about, gave
them some further instructions, and was about to dismiss them when he heard
a familiar, lisping, voice behind the shed.
"Devil take it!" said the voice of a man stumbling over something.
Prince Andrew looked out of the shed and saw Pierre, who had tripped over a
pole on the ground and had nearly fallen, coming his way. It was unpleasant to
Prince Andrew to meet people of his own set in general, and Pierre especially,
for he reminded him of all the painful moments of his last visit to Moscow.
"You? What a surprise!" said he. "What brings you here? This is unexpected!"
As he said this his eyes and face expressed more than coldness—they
expressed hostility, which Pierre noticed at once. He had approached the shed
full of animation, but on seeing Prince Andrew's face he felt constrained and
ill at ease.
"I have come... simply... you know... come... it interests me," said Pierre, who
had so often that day senselessly repeated that word "interesting." "I wish to
see the battle."
"Oh yes, and what do the masonic brothers say about war? How would they
stop it?" said Prince Andrew sarcastically. "Well, and how's Moscow? And my
people? Have they reached Moscow at last?" he asked seriously.
"Yes, they have. Julie Drubetskaya told me so. I went to see them, but missed
them. They have gone to your estate near Moscow."
CHAPTER XXV
The officers were about to take leave, but Prince Andrew, apparently reluctant
to be left alone with his friend, asked them to stay and have tea. Seats were
brought in and so was the tea. The officers gazed with surprise at Pierre's huge
stout figure and listened to his talk of Moscow and the position of our army,
round which he had ridden. Prince Andrew remained silent, and his expression
was so forbidding that Pierre addressed his remarks chiefly to the goodnatured battalion commander.
"So you understand the whole position of our troops?" Prince Andrew
interrupted him.
"Yes—that is, how do you mean?" said Pierre. "Not being a military man I
can't say I have understood it fully, but I understand the general position."
"Well, then, you know more than anyone else, be it who it may," said Prince
Andrew.
"Oh!" said Pierre, looking over his spectacles in perplexity at Prince Andrew.
"Well, and what do you think of Kutuzov's appointment?" he asked.
"I was very glad of his appointment, that's all I know," replied Prince Andrew.
"And tell me your opinion of Barclay de Tolly. In Moscow they are saying
heaven knows what about him.... What do you think of him?"
"Ask them," replied Prince Andrew, indicating the officers.
Pierre looked at Timokhin with the condescendingly interrogative smile with
which everybody involuntarily addressed that officer.
"We see light again, since his Serenity has been appointed, your excellency,"
said Timokhin timidly, and continually turning to glance at his colonel.
"Why so?" asked Pierre.
"Well, to mention only firewood and fodder, let me inform you. Why, when
we were retreating from Sventsyani we dare not touch a stick or a wisp of hay
or anything. You see, we were going away, so he would get it all; wasn't it so,
your excellency?" and again Timokhin turned to the prince. "But we daren't. In
our regiment two officers were court-martialed for that kind of thing. But
when his Serenity took command everything became straight forward. Now
we see light..."
"Then why was it forbidden?"
Timokhin looked about in confusion, not knowing what or how to answer such
a question. Pierre put the same question to Prince Andrew.
"Why, so as not to lay waste the country we were abandoning to the enemy,"
said Prince Andrew with venomous irony. "It is very sound: one can't permit
the land to be pillaged and accustom the troops to marauding. At Smolensk too
he judged correctly that the French might outflank us, as they had larger
forces. But he could not understand this," cried Prince Andrew in a shrill voice
that seemed to escape him involuntarily: "he could not understand that there,
for the first time, we were fighting for Russian soil, and that there was a spirit
in the men such as I had never seen before, that we had held the French for
two days, and that that success had increased our strength tenfold. He ordered
us to retreat, and all our efforts and losses went for nothing. He had no thought
of betraying us, he tried to do the best he could, he thought out everything, and
that is why he is unsuitable. He is unsuitable now, just because he plans out
everything very thoroughly and accurately as every German has to. How can I
explain?... Well, say your father has a German valet, and he is a splendid valet
and satisfies your father's requirements better than you could, then it's all right
to let him serve. But if your father is mortally sick you'll send the valet away
and attend to your father with your own unpracticed, awkward hands, and will
soothe him better than a skilled man who is a stranger could. So it has been
with Barclay. While Russia was well, a foreigner could serve her and be a
splendid minister; but as soon as she is in danger she needs one of her own
kin. But in your club they have been making him out a traitor! They slander
him as a traitor, and the only result will be that afterwards, ashamed of their
false accusations, they will make him out a hero or a genius instead of a
traitor, and that will be still more unjust. He is an honest and very punctilious
German."
"And they say he's a skillful commander," rejoined Pierre.
"I don't understand what is meant by 'a skillful commander,'" replied Prince
Andrew ironically.
"A skillful commander?" replied Pierre. "Why, one who foresees all
contingencies... and foresees the adversary's intentions."
"But that's impossible," said Prince Andrew as if it were a matter settled long
ago.
Pierre looked at him in surprise.
"And yet they say that war is like a game of chess?" he remarked.
"Yes," replied Prince Andrew, "but with this little difference, that in chess you
may think over each move as long as you please and are not limited for time,
and with this difference too, that a knight is always stronger than a pawn, and
two pawns are always stronger than one, while in war a battalion is sometimes
stronger than a division and sometimes weaker than a company. The relative
strength of bodies of troops can never be known to anyone. Believe me," he
went on, "if things depended on arrangements made by the staff, I should be
there making arrangements, but instead of that I have the honor to serve here
in the regiment with these gentlemen, and I consider that on us tomorrow's
battle will depend and not on those others.... Success never depends, and never
will depend, on position, or equipment, or even on numbers, and least of all on
position."
"But on what then?"
"On the feeling that is in me and in him," he pointed to Timokhin, "and in each
soldier."
Prince Andrew glanced at Timokhin, who looked at his commander in alarm
and bewilderment. In contrast to his former reticent taciturnity Prince Andrew
now seemed excited. He could apparently not refrain from expressing the
thoughts that had suddenly occurred to him.
"A battle is won by those who firmly resolve to win it! Why did we lose the
battle at Austerlitz? The French losses were almost equal to ours, but very
early we said to ourselves that we were losing the battle, and we did lose it.
And we said so because we had nothing to fight for there, we wanted to get
away from the battlefield as soon as we could. 'We've lost, so let us run,' and
we ran. If we had not said that till the evening, heaven knows what might not
have happened. But tomorrow we shan't say it! You talk about our position,
the left flank weak and the right flank too extended," he went on. "That's all
nonsense, there's nothing of the kind. But what awaits us tomorrow? A
hundred million most diverse chances which will be decided on the instant by
the fact that our men or theirs run or do not run, and that this man or that man
is killed, but all that is being done at present is only play. The fact is that those
men with whom you have ridden round the position not only do not help
matters, but hinder. They are only concerned with their own petty interests."
"At such a moment?" said Pierre reproachfully.
"At such a moment!" Prince Andrew repeated. "To them it is only a moment
affording opportunities to undermine a rival and obtain an extra cross or
ribbon. For me tomorrow means this: a Russian army of a hundred thousand
and a French army of a hundred thousand have met to fight, and the thing is
that these two hundred thousand men will fight and the side that fights more
fiercely and spares itself least will win. And if you like I will tell you that
whatever happens and whatever muddles those at the top may make, we shall
win tomorrow's battle. Tomorrow, happen what may, we shall win!"
"There now, your excellency! That's the truth, the real truth," said Timokhin.
"Who would spare himself now? The soldiers in my battalion, believe me,
wouldn't drink their vodka! 'It's not the day for that!' they say."
All were silent. The officers rose. Prince Andrew went out of the shed with
them, giving final orders to the adjutant. After they had gone Pierre
approached Prince Andrew and was about to start a conversation when they
heard the clatter of three horses' hoofs on the road not far from the shed, and
looking in that direction Prince Andrew recognized Wolzogen and Clausewitz
accompanied by a Cossack. They rode close by continuing to converse, and
Prince Andrew involuntarily heard these words:
"Der Krieg muss in Raum verlegt werden. Der Ansicht kann ich nicht genug
Preis geben," * said one of them.
* "The war must be extended widely. I cannot sufficiently
commend that view."
"Oh, ja," said the other, "der Zweck ist nur den Feind zu schwächen, so kann
man gewiss nicht den Verlust der Privat-Personen in Achtung nehmen." *
* "Oh, yes, the only aim is to weaken the enemy, so of
course one cannot take into account the loss of private
individuals."
"Oh, no," agreed the other.
"Extend widely!" said Prince Andrew with an angry snort, when they had
ridden past. "In that 'extend' were my father, son, and sister, at Bald Hills.
That's all the same to him! That's what I was saying to you—those German
gentlemen won't win the battle tomorrow but will only make all the mess they
can, because they have nothing in their German heads but theories not worth
an empty eggshell and haven't in their hearts the one thing needed tomorrow—
that which Timokhin has. They have yielded up all Europe to him, and have
now come to teach us. Fine teachers!" and again his voice grew shrill.
"So you think we shall win tomorrow's battle?" asked Pierre.
"Yes, yes," answered Prince Andrew absently. "One thing I would do if I had
the power," he began again, "I would not take prisoners. Why take prisoners?
It's chivalry! The French have destroyed my home and are on their way to
destroy Moscow, they have outraged and are outraging me every moment.
They are my enemies. In my opinion they are all criminals. And so thinks
Timokhin and the whole army. They should be executed! Since they are my
foes they cannot be my friends, whatever may have been said at Tilsit."
"Yes, yes," muttered Pierre, looking with shining eyes at Prince Andrew. "I
quite agree with you!"
The question that had perturbed Pierre on the Mozhaysk hill and all that day
now seemed to him quite clear and completely solved. He now understood the
whole meaning and importance of this war and of the impending battle. All he
had seen that day, all the significant and stern expressions on the faces he had
seen in passing, were lit up for him by a new light. He understood that latent
heat (as they say in physics) of patriotism which was present in all these men
he had seen, and this explained to him why they all prepared for death calmly,
and as it were lightheartedly.
"Not take prisoners," Prince Andrew continued: "That by itself would quite
change the whole war and make it less cruel. As it is we have played at war—
that's what's vile! We play at magnanimity and all that stuff. Such
magnanimity and sensibility are like the magnanimity and sensibility of a lady
who faints when she sees a calf being killed: she is so kindhearted that she
can't look at blood, but enjoys eating the calf served up with sauce. They talk
to us of the rules of war, of chivalry, of flags of truce, of mercy to the
unfortunate and so on. It's all rubbish! I saw chivalry and flags of truce in
1805; they humbugged us and we humbugged them. They plunder other
people's houses, issue false paper money, and worst of all they kill my children
and my father, and then talk of rules of war and magnanimity to foes! Take no
prisoners, but kill and be killed! He who has come to this as I have through the
same sufferings..."
Prince Andrew, who had thought it was all the same to him whether or not
Moscow was taken as Smolensk had been, was suddenly checked in his
speech by an unexpected cramp in his throat. He paced up and down a few
times in silence, but his eyes glittered feverishly and his lips quivered as he
began speaking.
"If there was none of this magnanimity in war, we should go to war only when
it was worth while going to certain death, as now. Then there would not be
war because Paul Ivanovich had offended Michael Ivanovich. And when there
was a war, like this one, it would be war! And then the determination of the
troops would be quite different. Then all these Westphalians and Hessians
whom Napoleon is leading would not follow him into Russia, and we should
not go to fight in Austria and Prussia without knowing why. War is not
courtesy but the most horrible thing in life; and we ought to understand that
and not play at war. We ought to accept this terrible necessity sternly and
seriously. It all lies in that: get rid of falsehood and let war be war and not a
game. As it is now, war is the favorite pastime of the idle and frivolous. The
military calling is the most highly honored.
"But what is war? What is needed for success in warfare? What are the habits
of the military? The aim of war is murder; the methods of war are spying,
treachery, and their encouragement, the ruin of a country's inhabitants, robbing
them or stealing to provision the army, and fraud and falsehood termed
military craft. The habits of the military class are the absence of freedom, that
is, discipline, idleness, ignorance, cruelty, debauchery, and drunkenness. And
in spite of all this it is the highest class, respected by everyone. All the kings,
except the Chinese, wear military uniforms, and he who kills most people
receives the highest rewards.
"They meet, as we shall meet tomorrow, to murder one another; they kill and
maim tens of thousands, and then have thanksgiving services for having killed
so many people (they even exaggerate the number), and they announce a
victory, supposing that the more people they have killed the greater their
achievement. How does God above look at them and hear them?" exclaimed
Prince Andrew in a shrill, piercing voice. "Ah, my friend, it has of late become
hard for me to live. I see that I have begun to understand too much. And it
doesn't do for man to taste of the tree of knowledge of good and evil.... Ah,
well, it's not for long!" he added.
"However, you're sleepy, and it's time for me to sleep. Go back to Gorki!" said
Prince Andrew suddenly.
"Oh no!" Pierre replied, looking at Prince Andrew with frightened,
compassionate eyes.
"Go, go! Before a battle one must have one's sleep out," repeated Prince
Andrew.
He came quickly up to Pierre and embraced and kissed him. "Good-bye, be
off!" he shouted. "Whether we meet again or not..." and turning away
hurriedly he entered the shed.
It was already dark, and Pierre could not make out whether the expression of
Prince Andrew's face was angry or tender.
For some time he stood in silence considering whether he should follow him
or go away. "No, he does not want it!" Pierre concluded. "And I know that this
is our last meeting!" He sighed deeply and rode back to Gorki.
On re-entering the shed Prince Andrew lay down on a rug, but he could not
sleep.
He closed his eyes. One picture succeeded another in his imagination. On one
of them he dwelt long and joyfully. He vividly recalled an evening in
Petersburg. Natasha with animated and excited face was telling him how she
had gone to look for mushrooms the previous summer and had lost her way in
the big forest. She incoherently described the depths of the forest, her feelings,
and a talk with a beekeeper she met, and constantly interrupted her story to
say: "No, I can't! I'm not telling it right; no, you don't understand," though he
encouraged her by saying that he did understand, and he really had understood
all she wanted to say. But Natasha was not satisfied with her own words: she
felt that they did not convey the passionately poetic feeling she had
experienced that day and wished to convey. "He was such a delightful old
man, and it was so dark in the forest... and he had such kind... No, I can't
describe it," she had said, flushed and excited. Prince Andrew smiled now the
same happy smile as then when he had looked into her eyes. "I understood
her," he thought. "I not only understood her, but it was just that inner, spiritual
force, that sincerity, that frankness of soul—that very soul of hers which
seemed to be fettered by her body—it was that soul I loved in her... loved so
strongly and happily..." and suddenly he remembered how his love had ended.
"He did not need anything of that kind. He neither saw nor understood
anything of the sort. He only saw in her a pretty and fresh young girl, with
whom he did not deign to unite his fate. And I?... and he is still alive and gay!"
Prince Andrew jumped up as if someone had burned him, and again began
pacing up and down in front of the shed.
CHAPTER XXVI
On August 25, the eve of the battle of Borodino, M. de Beausset, prefect of the
French Emperor's palace, arrived at Napoleon's quarters at Valuevo with
Colonel Fabvier, the former from Paris and the latter from Madrid.
Donning his court uniform, M. de Beausset ordered a box he had brought for
the Emperor to be carried before him and entered the first compartment of
Napoleon's tent, where he began opening the box while conversing with
Napoleon's aides-de-camp who surrounded him.
Fabvier, not entering the tent, remained at the entrance talking to some
generals of his acquaintance.
The Emperor Napoleon had not yet left his bedroom and was finishing his
toilet. Slightly snorting and grunting, he presented now his back and now his
plump hairy chest to the brush with which his valet was rubbing him down.
Another valet, with his finger over the mouth of a bottle, was sprinkling Eau
de Cologne on the Emperor's pampered body with an expression which
seemed to say that he alone knew where and how much Eau de Cologne
should be sprinkled. Napoleon's short hair was wet and matted on the
forehead, but his face, though puffy and yellow, expressed physical
satisfaction. "Go on, harder, go on!" he muttered to the valet who was rubbing
him, slightly twitching and grunting. An aide-de-camp, who had entered the
bedroom to report to the Emperor the number of prisoners taken in yesterday's
action, was standing by the door after delivering his message, awaiting
permission to withdraw. Napoleon, frowning, looked at him from under his
brows.
"No prisoners!" said he, repeating the aide-de-camp's words. "They are forcing
us to exterminate them. So much the worse for the Russian army.... Go on...
harder, harder!" he muttered, hunching his back and presenting his fat
shoulders.
"All right. Let Monsieur de Beausset enter, and Fabvier too," he said, nodding
to the aide-de-camp.
"Yes, sire," and the aide-de-camp disappeared through the door of the tent.
Two valets rapidly dressed His Majesty, and wearing the blue uniform of the
Guards he went with firm quick steps to the reception room.
De Beausset's hands meanwhile were busily engaged arranging the present he
had brought from the Empress, on two chairs directly in front of the entrance.
But Napoleon had dressed and come out with such unexpected rapidity that he
had not time to finish arranging the surprise.
Napoleon noticed at once what they were about and guessed that they were not
ready. He did not wish to deprive them of the pleasure of giving him a
surprise, so he pretended not to see de Beausset and called Fabvier to him,
listening silently and with a stern frown to what Fabvier told him of the
heroism and devotion of his troops fighting at Salamanca, at the other end of
Europe, with but one thought—to be worthy of their Emperor—and but one
fear—to fail to please him. The result of that battle had been deplorable.
Napoleon made ironic remarks during Fabvier's account, as if he had not
expected that matters could go otherwise in his absence.
"I must make up for that in Moscow," said Napoleon. "I'll see you later," he
added, and summoned de Beausset, who by that time had prepared the
surprise, having placed something on the chairs and covered it with a cloth.
De Beausset bowed low, with that courtly French bow which only the old
retainers of the Bourbons knew how to make, and approached him, presenting
an envelope.
Napoleon turned to him gaily and pulled his ear.
"You have hurried here. I am very glad. Well, what is Paris saying?" he asked,
suddenly changing his former stern expression for a most cordial tone.
"Sire, all Paris regrets your absence," replied de Beausset as was proper.
But though Napoleon knew that de Beausset had to say something of this kind,
and though in his lucid moments he knew it was untrue, he was pleased to hear
it from him. Again he honored him by touching his ear.
"I am very sorry to have made you travel so far," said he.
"Sire, I expected nothing less than to find you at the gates of Moscow," replied
de Beausset.
Napoleon smiled and, lifting his head absent-mindedly, glanced to the right.
An aide-de-camp approached with gliding steps and offered him a gold
snuffbox, which he took.
"Yes, it has happened luckily for you," he said, raising the open snuffbox to his
nose. "You are fond of travel, and in three days you will see Moscow. You
surely did not expect to see that Asiatic capital. You will have a pleasant
journey."
De Beausset bowed gratefully at this regard for his taste for travel (of which
he had not till then been aware).
"Ha, what's this?" asked Napoleon, noticing that all the courtiers were looking
at something concealed under a cloth.
With courtly adroitness de Beausset half turned and without turning his back
to the Emperor retired two steps, twitching off the cloth at the same time, and
said:
"A present to Your Majesty from the Empress."
It was a portrait, painted in bright colors by Gerard, of the son borne to
Napoleon by the daughter of the Emperor of Austria, the boy whom for some
reason everyone called "The King of Rome."
A very pretty curly-headed boy with a look of the Christ in the Sistine
Madonna was depicted playing at stick and ball. The ball represented the
terrestrial globe and the stick in his other hand a scepter.
Though it was not clear what the artist meant to express by depicting the so-
called King of Rome spiking the earth with a stick, the allegory apparently
seemed to Napoleon, as it had done to all who had seen it in Paris, quite clear
and very pleasing.
"The King of Rome!" he said, pointing to the portrait with a graceful gesture.
"Admirable!"
With the natural capacity of an Italian for changing the expression of his face
at will, he drew nearer to the portrait and assumed a look of pensive
tenderness. He felt that what he now said and did would be historical, and it
seemed to him that it would now be best for him—whose grandeur enabled his
son to play stick and ball with the terrestrial globe—to show, in contrast to that
grandeur, the simplest paternal tenderness. His eyes grew dim, he moved
forward, glanced round at a chair (which seemed to place itself under him),
and sat down on it before the portrait. At a single gesture from him everyone
went out on tiptoe, leaving the great man to himself and his emotion.
Having sat still for a while he touched—himself not knowing why—the thick
spot of paint representing the highest light in the portrait, rose, and recalled de
Beausset and the officer on duty. He ordered the portrait to be carried outside
his tent, that the Old Guard, stationed round it, might not be deprived of the
pleasure of seeing the King of Rome, the son and heir of their adored
monarch.
And while he was doing M. de Beausset the honor of breakfasting with him,
they heard, as Napoleon had anticipated, the rapturous cries of the officers and
men of the Old Guard who had run up to see the portrait.
"Vive l'Empereur! Vive le roi de Rome! Vive l'Empereur!" came those ecstatic
cries.
After breakfast Napoleon in de Beausset's presence dictated his order of the
day to the army.
"Short and energetic!" he remarked when he had read over the proclamation
which he had dictated straight off without corrections. It ran:
Soldiers! This is the battle you have so longed for. Victory depends on you. It
is essential for us; it will give us all we need: comfortable quarters and a
speedy return to our country. Behave as you did at Austerlitz, Friedland,
Vitebsk, and Smolensk. Let our remotest posterity recall your achievements
this day with pride. Let it be said of each of you: "He was in the great battle
before Moscow!"
"Before Moscow!" repeated Napoleon, and inviting M. de Beausset, who was
so fond of travel, to accompany him on his ride, he went out of the tent to
where the horses stood saddled.
"Your Majesty is too kind!" replied de Beausset to the invitation to accompany
the Emperor; he wanted to sleep, did not know how to ride and was afraid of
doing so.
But Napoleon nodded to the traveler, and de Beausset had to mount. When
Napoleon came out of the tent the shouting of the Guards before his son's
portrait grew still louder. Napoleon frowned.
"Take him away!" he said, pointing with a gracefully majestic gesture to the
portrait. "It is too soon for him to see a field of battle."
De Beausset closed his eyes, bowed his head, and sighed deeply, to indicate
how profoundly he valued and comprehended the Emperor's words.
CHAPTER XXVII
On the twenty-fifth of August, so his historians tell us, Napoleon spent the
whole day on horseback inspecting the locality, considering plans submitted to
him by his marshals, and personally giving commands to his generals.
The original line of the Russian forces along the river Kolocha had been
dislocated by the capture of the Shevardino Redoubt on the twenty-fourth, and
part of the line—the left flank—had been drawn back. That part of the line
was not entrenched and in front of it the ground was more open and level than
elsewhere. It was evident to anyone, military or not, that it was here the
French should attack. It would seem that not much consideration was needed
to reach this conclusion, nor any particular care or trouble on the part of the
Emperor and his marshals, nor was there any need of that special and supreme
quality called genius that people are so apt to ascribe to Napoleon; yet the
historians who described the event later and the men who then surrounded
Napoleon, and he himself, thought otherwise.
Napoleon rode over the plain and surveyed the locality with a profound air and
in silence, nodded with approval or shook his head dubiously, and without
communicating to the generals around him the profound course of ideas which
guided his decisions merely gave them his final conclusions in the form of
commands. Having listened to a suggestion from Davout, who was now called
Prince d'Eckmuhl, to turn the Russian left wing, Napoleon said it should not
be done, without explaining why not. To a proposal made by General Campan
(who was to attack the fleches) to lead his division through the woods,
Napoleon agreed, though the so-called Duke of Elchingen (Ney) ventured to
remark that a movement through the woods was dangerous and might disorder
the division.
Having inspected the country opposite the Shevardino Redoubt, Napoleon
pondered a little in silence and then indicated the spots where two batteries
should be set up by the morrow to act against the Russian entrenchments, and
the places where, in line with them, the field artillery should be placed.
After giving these and other commands he returned to his tent, and the
dispositions for the battle were written down from his dictation.
These dispositions, of which the French historians write with enthusiasm and
other historians with profound respect, were as follows:
At dawn the two new batteries established during the night on the plain
occupied by the Prince d'Eckmuhl will open fire on the opposing batteries of
the enemy.
At the same time the commander of the artillery of the 1st Corps, General
Pernetti, with thirty cannon of Campan's division and all the howitzers of
Dessaix's and Friant's divisions, will move forward, open fire, and overwhelm
with shellfire the enemy's battery, against which will operate:
24 guns of the artillery of the Guards
30 guns of Campan's division
and 8 guns of Friant's and Dessaix's divisions
—
in all 62 guns.
The commander of the artillery of the 3rd Corps, General Fouche, will place
the howitzers of the 3rd and 8th Corps, sixteen in all, on the flanks of the
battery that is to bombard the entrenchment on the left, which will have forty
guns in all directed against it.
General Sorbier must be ready at the first order to advance with all the
howitzers of the Guard's artillery against either one or other of the
entrenchments.
During the cannonade Prince Poniatowski is to advance through the wood on
the village and turn the enemy's position.
General Campan will move through the wood to seize the first fortification.
After the advance has begun in this manner, orders will be given in accordance
with the enemy's movements.
The cannonade on the left flank will begin as soon as the guns of the right
wing are heard. The sharpshooters of Morand's division and of the vice-King's
division will open a heavy fire on seeing the attack commence on the right
wing.
The vice-King will occupy the village and cross by its three bridges,
advancing to the same heights as Morand's and Gibrard's divisions, which
under his leadership will be directed against the redoubt and come into line
with the rest of the forces.
All this must be done in good order (le tout se fera avec ordre et methode) as
far as possible retaining troops in reserve.
The Imperial Camp near Mozhaysk,
September, 6, 1812.
These dispositions, which are very obscure and confused if one allows oneself
to regard the arrangements without religious awe of his genius, related to
Napoleon's orders to deal with four points—four different orders. Not one of
these was, or could be, carried out.
In the disposition it is said first that the batteries placed on the spot chosen by
Napoleon, with the guns of Pernetti and Fouche; which were to come in line
with them, 102 guns in all, were to open fire and shower shells on the Russian
fleches and redoubts. This could not be done, as from the spots selected by
Napoleon the projectiles did not carry to the Russian works, and those 102
guns shot into the air until the nearest commander, contrary to Napoleon's
instructions, moved them forward.
The second order was that Poniatowski, moving to the village through the
wood, should turn the Russian left flank. This could not be done and was not
done, because Poniatowski, advancing on the village through the wood, met
Tuchkov there barring his way, and could not and did not turn the Russian
position.
The third order was: General Campan will move through the wood to seize the
first fortification. General Campan's division did not seize the first fortification
but was driven back, for on emerging from the wood it had to reform under
grapeshot, of which Napoleon was unaware.
The fourth order was: The vice-King will occupy the village (Borodino) and
cross by its three bridges, advancing to the same heights as Morand's and
Gibrard's divisions (for whose movements no directions are given), which
under his leadership will be directed against the redoubt and come into line
with the rest of the forces.
As far as one can make out, not so much from this unintelligible sentence as
from the attempts the vice-King made to execute the orders given him, he was
to advance from the left through Borodino to the redoubt while the divisions
of Morand and Gerard were to advance simultaneously from the front.
All this, like the other parts of the disposition, was not and could not be
executed. After passing through Borodino the vice-King was driven back to
the Kolocha and could get no farther; while the divisions of Morand and
Gerard did not take the redoubt but were driven back, and the redoubt was
only taken at the end of the battle by the cavalry (a thing probably unforeseen
and not heard of by Napoleon). So not one of the orders in the disposition was,
or could be, executed. But in the disposition it is said that, after the fight has
commenced in this manner, orders will be given in accordance with the
enemy's movements, and so it might be supposed that all necessary
arrangements would be made by Napoleon during the battle. But this was not
and could not be done, for during the whole battle Napoleon was so far away
that, as appeared later, he could not know the course of the battle and not one
of his orders during the fight could be executed.
CHAPTER XXVIII
Many historians say that the French did not win the battle of Borodino because
Napoleon had a cold, and that if he had not had a cold the orders he gave
before and during the battle would have been still more full of genius and
Russia would have been lost and the face of the world have been changed. To
historians who believe that Russia was shaped by the will of one man—Peter
the Great—and that France from a republic became an empire and French
armies went to Russia at the will of one man—Napoleon—to say that Russia
remained a power because Napoleon had a bad cold on the twenty-fourth of
August may seem logical and convincing.
If it had depended on Napoleon's will to fight or not to fight the battle of
Borodino, and if this or that other arrangement depended on his will, then
evidently a cold affecting the manifestation of his will might have saved
Russia, and consequently the valet who omitted to bring Napoleon his
waterproof boots on the twenty-fourth would have been the savior of Russia.
Along that line of thought such a deduction is indubitable, as indubitable as
the deduction Voltaire made in jest (without knowing what he was jesting at)
when he saw that the Massacre of St. Bartholomew was due to Charles IX's
stomach being deranged. But to men who do not admit that Russia was formed
by the will of one man, Peter I, or that the French Empire was formed and the
war with Russia begun by the will of one man, Napoleon, that argument seems
not merely untrue and irrational, but contrary to all human reality. To the
question of what causes historic events another answer presents itself, namely,
that the course of human events is predetermined from on high—depends on
the coincidence of the wills of all who take part in the events, and that a
Napoleon's influence on the course of these events is purely external and
fictitious.
Strange as at first glance it may seem to suppose that the Massacre of St.
Bartholomew was not due to Charles IX's will, though he gave the order for it
and thought it was done as a result of that order; and strange as it may seem to
suppose that the slaughter of eighty thousand men at Borodino was not due to
Napoleon's will, though he ordered the commencement and conduct of the
battle and thought it was done because he ordered it; strange as these
suppositions appear, yet human dignity—which tells me that each of us is, if
not more at least not less a man than the great Napoleon—demands the
acceptance of that solution of the question, and historic investigation
abundantly confirms it.
At the battle of Borodino Napoleon shot at no one and killed no one. That was
all done by the soldiers. Therefore it was not he who killed people.
The French soldiers went to kill and be killed at the battle of Borodino not
because of Napoleon's orders but by their own volition. The whole army—
French, Italian, German, Polish, and Dutch—hungry, ragged, and weary of the
campaign, felt at the sight of an army blocking their road to Moscow that the
wine was drawn and must be drunk. Had Napoleon then forbidden them to
fight the Russians, they would have killed him and have proceeded to fight the
Russians because it was inevitable.
When they heard Napoleon's proclamation offering them, as compensation for
mutilation and death, the words of posterity about their having been in the
battle before Moscow, they cried "Vive l'Empereur!" just as they had cried
"Vive l'Empereur!" at the sight of the portrait of the boy piercing the terrestrial
globe with a toy stick, and just as they would have cried "Vive l'Empereur!" at
any nonsense that might be told them. There was nothing left for them to do
but cry "Vive l'Empereur!" and go to fight, in order to get food and rest as
conquerors in Moscow. So it was not because of Napoleon's commands that
they killed their fellow men.
And it was not Napoleon who directed the course of the battle, for none of his
orders were executed and during the battle he did not know what was going on
before him. So the way in which these people killed one another was not
decided by Napoleon's will but occurred independently of him, in accord with
the will of hundreds of thousands of people who took part in the common
action. It only seemed to Napoleon that it all took place by his will. And so the
question whether he had or had not a cold has no more historic interest than
the cold of the least of the transport soldiers.
Moreover, the assertion made by various writers that his cold was the cause of
his dispositions not being as well-planned as on former occasions, and of his
orders during the battle not being as good as previously, is quite baseless,
which again shows that Napoleon's cold on the twenty-sixth of August was
unimportant.
The dispositions cited above are not at all worse, but are even better, than
previous dispositions by which he had won victories. His pseudo-orders
during the battle were also no worse than formerly, but much the same as
usual. These dispositions and orders only seem worse than previous ones
because the battle of Borodino was the first Napoleon did not win. The
profoundest and most excellent dispositions and orders seem very bad, and
every learned militarist criticizes them with looks of importance, when they
relate to a battle that has been lost, and the very worst dispositions and orders
seem very good, and serious people fill whole volumes to demonstrate their
merits, when they relate to a battle that has been won.
The dispositions drawn up by Weyrother for the battle of Austerlitz were a
model of perfection for that kind of composition, but still they were criticized
—criticized for their very perfection, for their excessive minuteness.
Napoleon at the battle of Borodino fulfilled his office as representative of
authority as well as, and even better than, at other battles. He did nothing
harmful to the progress of the battle; he inclined to the most reasonable
opinions, he made no confusion, did not contradict himself, did not get
frightened or run away from the field of battle, but with his great tact and
military experience carried out his role of appearing to command, calmly and
with dignity.
CHAPTER XXIX
On returning from a second inspection of the lines, Napoleon remarked:
"The chessmen are set up, the game will begin tomorrow!"
Having ordered punch and summoned de Beausset, he began to talk to him
about Paris and about some changes he meant to make in the Empress'
household, surprising the prefect by his memory of minute details relating to
the court.
He showed an interest in trifles, joked about de Beausset's love of travel, and
chatted carelessly, as a famous, self-confident surgeon who knows his job does
when turning up his sleeves and putting on his apron while a patient is being
strapped to the operating table. "The matter is in my hands and is clear and
definite in my head. When the time comes to set to work I shall do it as no one
else could, but now I can jest, and the more I jest and the calmer I am the more
tranquil and confident you ought to be, and the more amazed at my genius."
Having finished his second glass of punch, Napoleon went to rest before the
serious business which, he considered, awaited him next day. He was so much
interested in that task that he was unable to sleep, and in spite of his cold
which had grown worse from the dampness of the evening, he went into the
large division of the tent at three o'clock in the morning, loudly blowing his
nose. He asked whether the Russians had not withdrawn, and was told that the
enemy's fires were still in the same places. He nodded approval.
The adjutant in attendance came into the tent.
"Well, Rapp, do you think we shall do good business today?" Napoleon asked
him.
"Without doubt, sire," replied Rapp.
Napoleon looked at him.
"Do you remember, sire, what you did me the honor to say at Smolensk?"
continued Rapp. "The wine is drawn and must be drunk."
Napoleon frowned and sat silent for a long time leaning his head on his hand.
"This poor army!" he suddenly remarked. "It has diminished greatly since
Smolensk. Fortune is frankly a courtesan, Rapp. I have always said so and I
am beginning to experience it. But the Guards, Rapp, the Guards are intact?"
he remarked interrogatively.
"Yes, sire," replied Rapp.
Napoleon took a lozenge, put it in his mouth, and glanced at his watch. He was
not sleepy and it was still not nearly morning. It was impossible to give further
orders for the sake of killing time, for the orders had all been given and were
now being executed.
"Have the biscuits and rice been served out to the regiments of the Guards?"
asked Napoleon sternly.
"Yes, sire."
"The rice too?"
Rapp replied that he had given the Emperor's order about the rice, but
Napoleon shook his head in dissatisfaction as if not believing that his order
had been executed. An attendant came in with punch. Napoleon ordered
another glass to be brought for Rapp, and silently sipped his own.
"I have neither taste nor smell," he remarked, sniffing at his glass. "This cold
is tiresome. They talk about medicine—what is the good of medicine when it
can't cure a cold! Corvisart gave me these lozenges but they don't help at all.
What can doctors cure? One can't cure anything. Our body is a machine for
living. It is organized for that, it is its nature. Let life go on in it unhindered
and let it defend itself, it will do more than if you paralyze it by encumbering
it with remedies. Our body is like a perfect watch that should go for a certain
time; the watchmaker cannot open it, he can only adjust it by fumbling, and
that blindfold.... Yes, our body is just a machine for living, that is all."
And having entered on the path of definition, of which he was fond, Napoleon
suddenly and unexpectedly gave a new one.
"Do you know, Rapp, what military art is?" asked he. "It is the art of being
stronger than the enemy at a given moment. That's all."
Rapp made no reply.
"Tomorrow we shall have to deal with Kutuzov!" said Napoleon. "We shall
see! Do you remember at Braunau he commanded an army for three weeks
and did not once mount a horse to inspect his entrenchments.... We shall see!"
He looked at his watch. It was still only four o'clock. He did not feel sleepy.
The punch was finished and there was still nothing to do. He rose, walked to
and fro, put on a warm overcoat and a hat, and went out of the tent. The night
was dark and damp, a scarcely perceptible moisture was descending from
above. Near by, the campfires were dimly burning among the French Guards,
and in the distance those of the Russian line shone through the smoke. The
weather was calm, and the rustle and tramp of the French troops already
beginning to move to take up their positions were clearly audible.
Napoleon walked about in front of his tent, looked at the fires and listened to
these sounds, and as he was passing a tall guardsman in a shaggy cap, who
was standing sentinel before his tent and had drawn himself up like a black
pillar at sight of the Emperor, Napoleon stopped in front of him.
"What year did you enter the service?" he asked with that affectation of
military bluntness and geniality with which he always addressed the soldiers.
The man answered the question.
"Ah! One of the old ones! Has your regiment had its rice?"
"It has, Your Majesty."
Napoleon nodded and walked away.
At half-past five Napoleon rode to the village of Shevardino.
It was growing light, the sky was clearing, only a single cloud lay in the east.
The abandoned campfires were burning themselves out in the faint morning
light.
On the right a single deep report of a cannon resounded and died away in the
prevailing silence. Some minutes passed. A second and a third report shook
the air, then a fourth and a fifth boomed solemnly near by on the right.
The first shots had not yet ceased to reverberate before others rang out and yet
more were heard mingling with and overtaking one another.
Napoleon with his suite rode up to the Shevardino Redoubt where he
dismounted. The game had begun.
CHAPTER XXX
On returning to Gorki after having seen Prince Andrew, Pierre ordered his
groom to get the horses ready and to call him early in the morning, and then
immediately fell asleep behind a partition in a corner Boris had given up to
him.
Before he was thoroughly awake next morning everybody had already left the
hut. The panes were rattling in the little windows and his groom was shaking
him.
"Your excellency! Your excellency! Your excellency!" he kept repeating
pertinaciously while he shook Pierre by the shoulder without looking at him,
having apparently lost hope of getting him to wake up.
"What? Has it begun? Is it time?" Pierre asked, waking up.
"Hear the firing," said the groom, a discharged soldier. "All the gentlemen
have gone out, and his Serene Highness himself rode past long ago."
Pierre dressed hastily and ran out to the porch. Outside all was bright, fresh,
dewy, and cheerful. The sun, just bursting forth from behind a cloud that had
concealed it, was shining, with rays still half broken by the clouds, over the
roofs of the street opposite, on the dew-besprinkled dust of the road, on the
walls of the houses, on the windows, the fence, and on Pierre's horses standing
before the hut. The roar of guns sounded more distinct outside. An adjutant
accompanied by a Cossack passed by at a sharp trot.
"It's time, Count; it's time!" cried the adjutant.
Telling the groom to follow him with the horses, Pierre went down the street
to the knoll from which he had looked at the field of battle the day before. A
crowd of military men was assembled there, members of the staff could be
heard conversing in French, and Kutuzov's gray head in a white cap with a red
band was visible, his gray nape sunk between his shoulders. He was looking
through a field glass down the highroad before him.
Mounting the steps to the knoll Pierre looked at the scene before him,
spellbound by beauty. It was the same panorama he had admired from that
spot the day before, but now the whole place was full of troops and covered by
smoke clouds from the guns, and the slanting rays of the bright sun, rising
slightly to the left behind Pierre, cast upon it through the clear morning air
penetrating streaks of rosy, golden-tinted light and long dark shadows. The
forest at the farthest extremity of the panorama seemed carved in some
precious stone of a yellowish-green color; its undulating outline was
silhouetted against the horizon and was pierced beyond Valuevo by the
Smolensk highroad crowded with troops. Nearer at hand glittered golden
cornfields interspersed with copses. There were troops to be seen everywhere,
in front and to the right and left. All this was vivid, majestic, and unexpected;
but what impressed Pierre most of all was the view of the battlefield itself, of
Borodino and the hollows on both sides of the Kolocha.
Above the Kolocha, in Borodino and on both sides of it, especially to the left
where the Voyna flowing between its marshy banks falls into the Kolocha, a
mist had spread which seemed to melt, to dissolve, and to become translucent
when the brilliant sun appeared and magically colored and outlined
everything. The smoke of the guns mingled with this mist, and over the whole
expanse and through that mist the rays of the morning sun were reflected,
flashing back like lightning from the water, from the dew, and from the
bayonets of the troops crowded together by the riverbanks and in Borodino. A
white church could be seen through the mist, and here and there the roofs of
huts in Borodino as well as dense masses of soldiers, or green ammunition
chests and ordnance. And all this moved, or seemed to move, as the smoke
and mist spread out over the whole space. Just as in the mist-enveloped hollow
near Borodino, so along the entire line outside and above it and especially in
the woods and fields to the left, in the valleys and on the summits of the high
ground, clouds of powder smoke seemed continually to spring up out of
nothing, now singly, now several at a time, some translucent, others dense,
which, swelling, growing, rolling, and blending, extended over the whole
expanse.
These puffs of smoke and (strange to say) the sound of the firing produced the
chief beauty of the spectacle.
"Puff!"—suddenly a round compact cloud of smoke was seen merging from
violet into gray and milky white, and "boom!" came the report a second later.
"Puff! puff!"—and two clouds arose pushing one another and blending
together; and "boom, boom!" came the sounds confirming what the eye had
seen.
Pierre glanced round at the first cloud, which he had seen as a round compact
ball, and in its place already were balloons of smoke floating to one side, and
—"puff" (with a pause)—"puff, puff!" three and then four more appeared and
then from each, with the same interval—"boom—boom, boom!" came the
fine, firm, precise sounds in reply. It seemed as if those smoke clouds
sometimes ran and sometimes stood still while woods, fields, and glittering
bayonets ran past them. From the left, over fields and bushes, those large balls
of smoke were continually appearing followed by their solemn reports, while
nearer still, in the hollows and woods, there burst from the muskets small
cloudlets that had no time to become balls, but had their little echoes in just
the same way. "Trakh-ta-ta-takh!" came the frequent crackle of musketry, but
it was irregular and feeble in comparison with the reports of the cannon.
Pierre wished to be there with that smoke, those shining bayonets, that
movement, and those sounds. He turned to look at Kutuzov and his suite, to
compare his impressions with those of others. They were all looking at the
field of battle as he was, and, as it seemed to him, with the same feelings. All
their faces were now shining with that latent warmth of feeling Pierre had
noticed the day before and had fully understood after his talk with Prince
Andrew.
"Go, my dear fellow, go... and Christ be with you!" Kutuzov was saying to a
general who stood beside him, not taking his eye from the battlefield.
Having received this order the general passed by Pierre on his way down the
knoll.
"To the crossing!" said the general coldly and sternly in reply to one of the
staff who asked where he was going.
"I'll go there too, I too!" thought Pierre, and followed the general.
The general mounted a horse a Cossack had brought him. Pierre went to his
groom who was holding his horses and, asking which was the quietest,
clambered onto it, seized it by the mane, and turning out his toes pressed his
heels against its sides and, feeling that his spectacles were slipping off but
unable to let go of the mane and reins, he galloped after the general, causing
the staff officers to smile as they watched him from the knoll.
CHAPTER XXXI
Having descended the hill the general after whom Pierre was galloping turned
sharply to the left, and Pierre, losing sight of him, galloped in among some
ranks of infantry marching ahead of him. He tried to pass either in front of
them or to the right or left, but there were soldiers everywhere, all with the
same preoccupied expression and busy with some unseen but evidently
important task. They all gazed with the same dissatisfied and inquiring
expression at this stout man in a white hat, who for some unknown reason
threatened to trample them under his horse's hoofs.
"Why ride into the middle of the battalion?" one of them shouted at him.
Another prodded his horse with the butt end of a musket, and Pierre, bending
over his saddlebow and hardly able to control his shying horse, galloped ahead
of the soldiers where there was a free space.
There was a bridge ahead of him, where other soldiers stood firing. Pierre rode
up to them. Without being aware of it he had come to the bridge across the
Kolocha between Gorki and Borodino, which the French (having occupied
Borodino) were attacking in the first phase of the battle. Pierre saw that there
was a bridge in front of him and that soldiers were doing something on both
sides of it and in the meadow, among the rows of new-mown hay which he
had taken no notice of amid the smoke of the campfires the day before; but
despite the incessant firing going on there he had no idea that this was the field
of battle. He did not notice the sound of the bullets whistling from every side,
or the projectiles that flew over him, did not see the enemy on the other side of
the river, and for a long time did not notice the killed and wounded, though
many fell near him. He looked about him with a smile which did not leave his
face.
"Why's that fellow in front of the line?" shouted somebody at him again.
"To the left!... Keep to the right!" the men shouted to him.
Pierre went to the right, and unexpectedly encountered one of Raevski's
adjutants whom he knew. The adjutant looked angrily at him, evidently also
intending to shout at him, but on recognizing him he nodded.
"How have you got here?" he said, and galloped on.
Pierre, feeling out of place there, having nothing to do, and afraid of getting in
someone's way again, galloped after the adjutant.
"What's happening here? May I come with you?" he asked.
"One moment, one moment!" replied the adjutant, and riding up to a stout
colonel who was standing in the meadow, he gave him some message and then
addressed Pierre.
"Why have you come here, Count?" he asked with a smile. "Still inquisitive?"
"Yes, yes," assented Pierre.
But the adjutant turned his horse about and rode on.
"Here it's tolerable," said he, "but with Bagration on the left flank they're
getting it frightfully hot."
"Really?" said Pierre. "Where is that?"
"Come along with me to our knoll. We can get a view from there and in our
battery it is still bearable," said the adjutant. "Will you come?"
"Yes, I'll come with you," replied Pierre, looking round for his groom.
It was only now that he noticed wounded men staggering along or being
carried on stretchers. On that very meadow he had ridden over the day before,
a soldier was lying athwart the rows of scented hay, with his head thrown
awkwardly back and his shako off.
"Why haven't they carried him away?" Pierre was about to ask, but seeing the
stern expression of the adjutant who was also looking that way, he checked
himself.
Pierre did not find his groom and rode along the hollow with the adjutant to
Raevski's Redoubt. His horse lagged behind the adjutant's and jolted him at
every step.
"You don't seem to be used to riding, Count?" remarked the adjutant.
"No it's not that, but her action seems so jerky," said Pierre in a puzzled tone.
"Why... she's wounded!" said the adjutant. "In the off foreleg above the knee.
A bullet, no doubt. I congratulate you, Count, on your baptism of fire!"
Having ridden in the smoke past the Sixth Corps, behind the artillery which
had been moved forward and was in action, deafening them with the noise of
firing, they came to a small wood. There it was cool and quiet, with a scent of
autumn. Pierre and the adjutant dismounted and walked up the hill on foot.
"Is the general here?" asked the adjutant on reaching the knoll.
"He was here a minute ago but has just gone that way," someone told him,
pointing to the right.
The adjutant looked at Pierre as if puzzled what to do with him now.
"Don't trouble about me," said Pierre. "I'll go up onto the knoll if I may?"
"Yes, do. You'll see everything from there and it's less dangerous, and I'll come
for you."
Pierre went to the battery and the adjutant rode on. They did not meet again,
and only much later did Pierre learn that he lost an arm that day.
The knoll to which Pierre ascended was that famous one afterwards known to
the Russians as the Knoll Battery or Raevski's Redoubt, and to the French as la
grande redoute, la fatale redoute, la redoute du centre, around which tens of
thousands fell, and which the French regarded as the key to the whole
position.
This redoubt consisted of a knoll, on three sides of which trenches had been
dug. Within the entrenchment stood ten guns that were being fired through
openings in the earthwork.
In line with the knoll on both sides stood other guns which also fired
incessantly. A little behind the guns stood infantry. When ascending that knoll
Pierre had no notion that this spot, on which small trenches had been dug and
from which a few guns were firing, was the most important point of the battle.
On the contrary, just because he happened to be there he thought it one of the
least significant parts of the field.
Having reached the knoll, Pierre sat down at one end of a trench surrounding
the battery and gazed at what was going on around him with an unconsciously
happy smile. Occasionally he rose and walked about the battery still with that
same smile, trying not to obstruct the soldiers who were loading, hauling the
guns, and continually running past him with bags and charges. The guns of
that battery were being fired continually one after another with a deafening
roar, enveloping the whole neighborhood in powder smoke.
In contrast with the dread felt by the infantrymen placed in support, here in the
battery where a small number of men busy at their work were separated from
the rest by a trench, everyone experienced a common and as it were family
feeling of animation.
The intrusion of Pierre's nonmilitary figure in a white hat made an unpleasant
impression at first. The soldiers looked askance at him with surprise and even
alarm as they went past him. The senior artillery officer, a tall, long-legged,
pockmarked man, moved over to Pierre as if to see the action of the farthest
gun and looked at him with curiosity.
A young round-faced officer, quite a boy still and evidently only just out of the
Cadet College, who was zealously commanding the two guns entrusted to him,
addressed Pierre sternly.
"Sir," he said, "permit me to ask you to stand aside. You must not be here."
The soldiers shook their heads disapprovingly as they looked at Pierre. But
when they had convinced themselves that this man in the white hat was doing
no harm, but either sat quietly on the slope of the trench with a shy smile or,
politely making way for the soldiers, paced up and down the battery under fire
as calmly as if he were on a boulevard, their feeling of hostile distrust
gradually began to change into a kindly and bantering sympathy, such as
soldiers feel for their dogs, cocks, goats, and in general for the animals that
live with the regiment. The men soon accepted Pierre into their family,
adopted him, gave him a nickname ("our gentleman"), and made kindly fun of
him among themselves.
A shell tore up the earth two paces from Pierre and he looked around with a
smile as he brushed from his clothes some earth it had thrown up.
"And how's it you're not afraid, sir, really now?" a red-faced, broad-shouldered
soldier asked Pierre, with a grin that disclosed a set of sound, white teeth.
"Are you afraid, then?" said Pierre.
"What else do you expect?" answered the soldier. "She has no mercy, you
know! When she comes spluttering down, out go your innards. One can't help
being afraid," he said laughing.
Several of the men, with bright kindly faces, stopped beside Pierre. They
seemed not to have expected him to talk like anybody else, and the discovery
that he did so delighted them.
"It's the business of us soldiers. But in a gentleman it's wonderful! There's a
gentleman for you!"
"To your places!" cried the young officer to the men gathered round Pierre.
The young officer was evidently exercising his duties for the first or second
time and therefore treated both his superiors and the men with great precision
and formality.
The booming cannonade and the fusillade of musketry were growing more
intense over the whole field, especially to the left where Bagration's fleches
were, but where Pierre was the smoke of the firing made it almost impossible
to distinguish anything. Moreover, his whole attention was engrossed by
watching the family circle—separated from all else—formed by the men in the
battery. His first unconscious feeling of joyful animation produced by the
sights and sounds of the battlefield was now replaced by another, especially
since he had seen that soldier lying alone in the hayfield. Now, seated on the
slope of the trench, he observed the faces of those around him.
By ten o'clock some twenty men had already been carried away from the
battery; two guns were smashed and cannon balls fell more and more
frequently on the battery and spent bullets buzzed and whistled around. But
the men in the battery seemed not to notice this, and merry voices and jokes
were heard on all sides.
"A live one!" shouted a man as a whistling shell approached.
"Not this way! To the infantry!" added another with loud laughter, seeing the
shell fly past and fall into the ranks of the supports.
"Are you bowing to a friend, eh?" remarked another, chaffing a peasant who
ducked low as a cannon ball flew over.
Several soldiers gathered by the wall of the trench, looking out to see what
was happening in front.
"They've withdrawn the front line, it has retired," said they, pointing over the
earthwork.
"Mind your own business," an old sergeant shouted at them. "If they've retired
it's because there's work for them to do farther back."
And the sergeant, taking one of the men by the shoulders, gave him a shove
with his knee. This was followed by a burst of laughter.
"To the fifth gun, wheel it up!" came shouts from one side.
"Now then, all together, like bargees!" rose the merry voices of those who
were moving the gun.
"Oh, she nearly knocked our gentleman's hat off!" cried the red-faced
humorist, showing his teeth chaffing Pierre. "Awkward baggage!" he added
reproachfully to a cannon ball that struck a cannon wheel and a man's leg.
"Now then, you foxes!" said another, laughing at some militiamen who,
stooping low, entered the battery to carry away the wounded man.
"So this gruel isn't to your taste? Oh, you crows! You're scared!" they shouted
at the militiamen who stood hesitating before the man whose leg had been torn
off.
"There, lads... oh, oh!" they mimicked the peasants, "they don't like it at all!"
Pierre noticed that after every ball that hit the redoubt, and after every loss, the
liveliness increased more and more.
As the flames of the fire hidden within come more and more vividly and
rapidly from an approaching thundercloud, so, as if in opposition to what was
taking place, the lightning of hidden fire growing more and more intense
glowed in the faces of these men.
Pierre did not look out at the battlefield and was not concerned to know what
was happening there; he was entirely absorbed in watching this fire which
burned ever more brightly and which he felt was flaming up in the same way
in his own soul.
At ten o'clock the infantry that had been among the bushes in front of the
battery and along the Kamenka streamlet retreated. From the battery they
could be seen running back past it carrying their wounded on their muskets. A
general with his suite came to the battery, and after speaking to the colonel
gave Pierre an angry look and went away again having ordered the infantry
supports behind the battery to lie down, so as to be less exposed to fire. After
this from amid the ranks of infantry to the right of the battery came the sound
of a drum and shouts of command, and from the battery one saw how those
ranks of infantry moved forward.
Pierre looked over the wall of the trench and was particularly struck by a pale
young officer who, letting his sword hang down, was walking backwards and
kept glancing uneasily around.
The ranks of the infantry disappeared amid the smoke but their long-drawn
shout and rapid musketry firing could still be heard. A few minutes later
crowds of wounded men and stretcher-bearers came back from that direction.
Projectiles began to fall still more frequently in the battery. Several men were
lying about who had not been removed. Around the cannon the men moved
still more briskly and busily. No one any longer took notice of Pierre. Once or
twice he was shouted at for being in the way. The senior officer moved with
big, rapid strides from one gun to another with a frowning face. The young
officer, with his face still more flushed, commanded the men more
scrupulously than ever. The soldiers handed up the charges, turned, loaded,
and did their business with strained smartness. They gave little jumps as they
walked, as though they were on springs.
The stormcloud had come upon them, and in every face the fire which Pierre
had watched kindle burned up brightly. Pierre standing beside the
commanding officer. The young officer, his hand to his shako, ran up to his
superior.
"I have the honor to report, sir, that only eight rounds are left. Are we to
continue firing?" he asked.
"Grapeshot!" the senior shouted, without answering the question, looking over
the wall of the trench.
Suddenly something happened: the young officer gave a gasp and bending
double sat down on the ground like a bird shot on the wing. Everything
became strange, confused, and misty in Pierre's eyes.
One cannon ball after another whistled by and struck the earthwork, a soldier,
or a gun. Pierre, who had not noticed these sounds before, now heard nothing
else. On the right of the battery soldiers shouting "Hurrah!" were running not
forwards but backwards, it seemed to Pierre.
A cannon ball struck the very end of the earth work by which he was standing,
crumbling down the earth; a black ball flashed before his eyes and at the same
instant plumped into something. Some militiamen who were entering the
battery ran back.
"All with grapeshot!" shouted the officer.
The sergeant ran up to the officer and in a frightened whisper informed him
(as a butler at dinner informs his master that there is no more of some wine
asked for) that there were no more charges.
"The scoundrels! What are they doing?" shouted the officer, turning to Pierre.
The officer's face was red and perspiring and his eyes glittered under his
frowning brow.
"Run to the reserves and bring up the ammunition boxes!" he yelled, angrily
avoiding Pierre with his eyes and speaking to his men.
"I'll go," said Pierre.
The officer, without answering him, strode across to the opposite side.
"Don't fire.... Wait!" he shouted.
The man who had been ordered to go for ammunition stumbled against Pierre.
"Eh, sir, this is no place for you," said he, and ran down the slope.
Pierre ran after him, avoiding the spot where the young officer was sitting.
One cannon ball, another, and a third flew over him, falling in front, beside,
and behind him. Pierre ran down the slope. "Where am I going?" he suddenly
asked himself when he was already near the green ammunition wagons. He
halted irresolutely, not knowing whether to return or go on. Suddenly a terrible
concussion threw him backwards to the ground. At the same instant he was
dazzled by a great flash of flame, and immediately a deafening roar, crackling,
and whistling made his ears tingle.
When he came to himself he was sitting on the ground leaning on his hands;
the ammunition wagons he had been approaching no longer existed, only
charred green boards and rags littered the scorched grass, and a horse,
dangling fragments of its shaft behind it, galloped past, while another horse
lay, like Pierre, on the ground, uttering prolonged and piercing cries.
CHAPTER XXXII
Beside himself with terror Pierre jumped up and ran back to the battery, as to
the only refuge from the horrors that surrounded him.
On entering the earthwork he noticed that there were men doing something
there but that no shots were being fired from the battery. He had no time to
realize who these men were. He saw the senior officer lying on the earth wall
with his back turned as if he were examining something down below and that
one of the soldiers he had noticed before was struggling forward shouting
"Brothers!" and trying to free himself from some men who were holding him
by the arm. He also saw something else that was strange.
But he had not time to realize that the colonel had been killed, that the soldier
shouting "Brothers!" was a prisoner, and that another man had been bayoneted
in the back before his eyes, for hardly had he run into the redoubt before a
thin, sallow-faced, perspiring man in a blue uniform rushed on him sword in
hand, shouting something. Instinctively guarding against the shock—for they
had been running together at full speed before they saw one another—Pierre
put out his hands and seized the man (a French officer) by the shoulder with
one hand and by the throat with the other. The officer, dropping his sword,
seized Pierre by his collar.
For some seconds they gazed with frightened eyes at one another's unfamiliar
faces and both were perplexed at what they had done and what they were to do
next. "Am I taken prisoner or have I taken him prisoner?" each was thinking.
But the French officer was evidently more inclined to think he had been taken
prisoner because Pierre's strong hand, impelled by instinctive fear, squeezed
his throat ever tighter and tighter. The Frenchman was about to say something,
when just above their heads, terrible and low, a cannon ball whistled, and it
seemed to Pierre that the French officer's head had been torn off, so swiftly
had he ducked it.
Pierre too bent his head and let his hands fall. Without further thought as to
who had taken whom prisoner, the Frenchman ran back to the battery and
Pierre ran down the slope stumbling over the dead and wounded who, it
seemed to him, caught at his feet. But before he reached the foot of the knoll
he was met by a dense crowd of Russian soldiers who, stumbling, tripping up,
and shouting, ran merrily and wildly toward the battery. (This was the attack
for which Ermolov claimed the credit, declaring that only his courage and
good luck made such a feat possible: it was the attack in which he was said to
have thrown some St. George's Crosses he had in his pocket into the battery
for the first soldiers to take who got there.)
The French who had occupied the battery fled, and our troops shouting
"Hurrah!" pursued them so far beyond the battery that it was difficult to call
them back.
The prisoners were brought down from the battery and among them was a
wounded French general, whom the officers surrounded. Crowds of wounded
—some known to Pierre and some unknown—Russians and French, with
faces distorted by suffering, walked, crawled, and were carried on stretchers
from the battery. Pierre again went up onto the knoll where he had spent over
an hour, and of that family circle which had received him as a member he did
not find a single one. There were many dead whom he did not know, but some
he recognized. The young officer still sat in the same way, bent double, in a
pool of blood at the edge of the earth wall. The red-faced man was still
twitching, but they did not carry him away.
Pierre ran down the slope once more.
"Now they will stop it, now they will be horrified at what they have done!" he
thought, aimlessly going toward a crowd of stretcher bearers moving from the
battlefield.
But behind the veil of smoke the sun was still high, and in front and especially
to the left, near Semenovsk, something seemed to be seething in the smoke,
and the roar of cannon and musketry did not diminish, but even increased to
desperation like a man who, straining himself, shrieks with all his remaining
strength.
CHAPTER XXXIII
The chief action of the battle of Borodino was fought within the seven
thousand feet between Borodino and Bagration's fleches. Beyond that space
there was, on the one side, a demonstration made by the Russians with
Uvarov's cavalry at midday, and on the other side, beyond Utitsa,
Poniatowski's collision with Tuchkov; but these two were detached and feeble
actions in comparison with what took place in the center of the battlefield. On
the field between Borodino and the fleches, beside the wood, the chief action
of the day took place on an open space visible from both sides and was fought
in the simplest and most artless way.
The battle began on both sides with a cannonade from several hundred guns.
Then when the whole field was covered with smoke, two divisions, Campan's
and Dessaix's, advanced from the French right, while Murat's troops advanced
on Borodino from their left.
From the Shevardino Redoubt where Napoleon was standing the fleches were
two thirds of a mile away, and it was more than a mile as the crow flies to
Borodino, so that Napoleon could not see what was happening there,
especially as the smoke mingling with the mist hid the whole locality. The
soldiers of Dessaix's division advancing against the fleches could only be seen
till they had entered the hollow that lay between them and the fleches. As soon
as they had descended into that hollow, the smoke of the guns and musketry
on the fleches grew so dense that it covered the whole approach on that side of
it. Through the smoke glimpses could be caught of something black—
probably men—and at times the glint of bayonets. But whether they were
moving or stationary, whether they were French or Russian, could not be
discovered from the Shevardino Redoubt.
The sun had risen brightly and its slanting rays struck straight into Napoleon's
face as, shading his eyes with his hand, he looked at the fleches. The smoke
spread out before them, and at times it looked as if the smoke were moving, at
times as if the troops moved. Sometimes shouts were heard through the firing,
but it was impossible to tell what was being done there.
Napoleon, standing on the knoll, looked through a field glass, and in its small
circlet saw smoke and men, sometimes his own and sometimes Russians, but
when he looked again with the naked eye, he could not tell where what he had
seen was.
He descended the knoll and began walking up and down before it.
Occasionally he stopped, listened to the firing, and gazed intently at the
battlefield.
But not only was it impossible to make out what was happening from where
he was standing down below, or from the knoll above on which some of his
generals had taken their stand, but even from the fleches themselves—in
which by this time there were now Russian and now French soldiers,
alternately or together, dead, wounded, alive, frightened, or maddened—even
at those fleches themselves it was impossible to make out what was taking
place. There for several hours amid incessant cannon and musketry fire, now
Russians were seen alone, now Frenchmen alone, now infantry, and now
cavalry: they appeared, fired, fell, collided, not knowing what to do with one
another, screamed, and ran back again.
From the battlefield adjutants he had sent out, and orderlies from his marshals,
kept galloping up to Napoleon with reports of the progress of the action, but
all these reports were false, both because it was impossible in the heat of battle
to say what was happening at any given moment and because many of the
adjutants did not go to the actual place of conflict but reported what they had
heard from others; and also because while an adjutant was riding more than a
mile to Napoleon circumstances changed and the news he brought was already
becoming false. Thus an adjutant galloped up from Murat with tidings that
Borodino had been occupied and the bridge over the Kolocha was in the hands
of the French. The adjutant asked whether Napoleon wished the troops to
cross it? Napoleon gave orders that the troops should form up on the farther
side and wait. But before that order was given—almost as soon in fact as the
adjutant had left Borodino—the bridge had been retaken by the Russians and
burned, in the very skirmish at which Pierre had been present at the beginning
of the battle.
An adjutant galloped up from the fleches with a pale and frightened face and
reported to Napoleon that their attack had been repulsed, Campan wounded,
and Davout killed; yet at the very time the adjutant had been told that the
French had been repulsed, the fleches had in fact been recaptured by other
French troops, and Davout was alive and only slightly bruised. On the basis of
these necessarily untrustworthy reports Napoleon gave his orders, which had
either been executed before he gave them or could not be and were not
executed.
The marshals and generals, who were nearer to the field of battle but, like
Napoleon, did not take part in the actual fighting and only occasionally went
within musket range, made their own arrangements without asking Napoleon
and issued orders where and in what direction to fire and where cavalry should
gallop and infantry should run. But even their orders, like Napoleon's, were
seldom carried out, and then but partially. For the most part things happened
contrary to their orders. Soldiers ordered to advance ran back on meeting
grapeshot; soldiers ordered to remain where they were, suddenly, seeing
Russians unexpectedly before them, sometimes rushed back and sometimes
forward, and the cavalry dashed without orders in pursuit of the flying
Russians. In this way two cavalry regiments galloped through the Semenovsk
hollow and as soon as they reached the top of the incline turned round and
galloped full speed back again. The infantry moved in the same way,
sometimes running to quite other places than those they were ordered to go to.
All orders as to where and when to move the guns, when to send infantry to
shoot or horsemen to ride down the Russian infantry—all such orders were
given by the officers on the spot nearest to the units concerned, without asking
either Ney, Davout, or Murat, much less Napoleon. They did not fear getting
into trouble for not fulfilling orders or for acting on their own initiative, for in
battle what is at stake is what is dearest to man—his own life—and it
sometimes seems that safety lies in running back, sometimes in running
forward; and these men who were right in the heat of the battle acted
according to the mood of the moment. In reality, however, all these
movements forward and backward did not improve or alter the position of the
troops. All their rushing and galloping at one another did little harm, the harm
of disablement and death was caused by the balls and bullets that flew over the
fields on which these men were floundering about. As soon as they left the
place where the balls and bullets were flying about, their superiors, located in
the background, re-formed them and brought them under discipline and under
the influence of that discipline led them back to the zone of fire, where under
the influence of fear of death they lost their discipline and rushed about
according to the chance promptings of the throng.
CHAPTER XXXIV
Napoleon's generals—Davout, Ney, and Murat, who were near that region of
fire and sometimes even entered it—repeatedly led into it huge masses of
well-ordered troops. But contrary to what had always happened in their former
battles, instead of the news they expected of the enemy's flight, these orderly
masses returned thence as disorganized and terrified mobs. The generals reformed them,
but their numbers constantly decreased. In the middle of the day
Murat sent his adjutant to Napoleon to demand reinforcements.
Napoleon sat at the foot of the knoll, drinking punch, when Murat's adjutant
galloped up with an assurance that the Russians would be routed if His
Majesty would let him have another division.
"Reinforcements?" said Napoleon in a tone of stern surprise, looking at the
adjutant—a handsome lad with long black curls arranged like Murat's own—
as though he did not understand his words.
"Reinforcements!" thought Napoleon to himself. "How can they need
reinforcements when they already have half the army directed against a weak,
unentrenched Russian wing?"
"Tell the King of Naples," said he sternly, "that it is not noon yet, and I don't
yet see my chessboard clearly. Go!..."
The handsome boy adjutant with the long hair sighed deeply without removing
his hand from his hat and galloped back to where men were being slaughtered.
Napoleon rose and having summoned Caulaincourt and Berthier began talking
to them about matters unconnected with the battle.
In the midst of this conversation, which was beginning to interest Napoleon,
Berthier's eyes turned to look at a general with a suite, who was galloping
toward the knoll on a lathering horse. It was Belliard. Having dismounted he
went up to the Emperor with rapid strides and in a loud voice began boldly
demonstrating the necessity of sending reinforcements. He swore on his honor
that the Russians were lost if the Emperor would give another division.
Napoleon shrugged his shoulders and continued to pace up and down without
replying. Belliard began talking loudly and eagerly to the generals of the suite
around him.
"You are very fiery, Belliard," said Napoleon, when he again came up to the
general. "In the heat of a battle it is easy to make a mistake. Go and have
another look and then come back to me."
Before Belliard was out of sight, a messenger from another part of the
battlefield galloped up.
"Now then, what do you want?" asked Napoleon in the tone of a man irritated
at being continually disturbed.
"Sire, the prince..." began the adjutant.
"Asks for reinforcements?" said Napoleon with an angry gesture.
The adjutant bent his head affirmatively and began to report, but the Emperor
turned from him, took a couple of steps, stopped, came back, and called
Berthier.
"We must give reserves," he said, moving his arms slightly apart. "Who do
you think should be sent there?" he asked of Berthier (whom he subsequently
termed "that gosling I have made an eagle").
"Send Claparede's division, sire," replied Berthier, who knew all the division's
regiments, and battalions by heart.
Napoleon nodded assent.
The adjutant galloped to Claparede's division and a few minutes later the
Young Guards stationed behind the knoll moved forward. Napoleon gazed
silently in that direction.
"No!" he suddenly said to Berthier. "I can't send Claparede. Send Friant's
division."
Though there was no advantage in sending Friant's division instead of
Claparede's, and even an obvious inconvenience and delay in stopping
Claparede and sending Friant now, the order was carried out exactly. Napoleon
did not notice that in regard to his army he was playing the part of a doctor
who hinders by his medicines—a role he so justly understood and condemned.
Friant's division disappeared as the others had done into the smoke of the
battlefield. From all sides adjutants continued to arrive at a gallop and as if by
agreement all said the same thing. They all asked for reinforcements and all
said that the Russians were holding their positions and maintaining a hellish
fire under which the French army was melting away.
Napoleon sat on a campstool, wrapped in thought.
M. de Beausset, the man so fond of travel, having fasted since morning, came
up to the Emperor and ventured respectfully to suggest lunch to His Majesty.
"I hope I may now congratulate Your Majesty on a victory?" said he.
Napoleon silently shook his head in negation. Assuming the negation to refer
only to the victory and not to the lunch, M. de Beausset ventured with
respectful jocularity to remark that there is no reason for not having lunch
when one can get it.
"Go away..." exclaimed Napoleon suddenly and morosely, and turned aside.
A beatific smile of regret, repentance, and ecstasy beamed on M. de Beausset's
face and he glided away to the other generals.
Napoleon was experiencing a feeling of depression like that of an ever-lucky
gambler who, after recklessly flinging money about and always winning,
suddenly just when he has calculated all the chances of the game, finds that
the more he considers his play the more surely he loses.
His troops were the same, his generals the same, the same preparations had
been made, the same dispositions, and the same proclamation courte et
energique, he himself was still the same: he knew that and knew that he was
now even more experienced and skillful than before. Even the enemy was the
same as at Austerlitz and Friedland—yet the terrible stroke of his arm had
supernaturally become impotent.
All the old methods that had been unfailingly crowned with success: the
concentration of batteries on one point, an attack by reserves to break the
enemy's line, and a cavalry attack by "the men of iron," all these methods had
already been employed, yet not only was there no victory, but from all sides
came the same news of generals killed and wounded, of reinforcements
needed, of the impossibility of driving back the Russians, and of
disorganization among his own troops.
Formerly, after he had given two or three orders and uttered a few phrases,
marshals and adjutants had come galloping up with congratulations and happy
faces, announcing the trophies taken, the corps of prisoners, bundles of enemy
eagles and standards, cannon and stores, and Murat had only begged leave to
loose the cavalry to gather in the baggage wagons. So it had been at Lodi,
Marengo, Arcola, Jena, Austerlitz, Wagram, and so on. But now something
strange was happening to his troops.
Despite news of the capture of the fleches, Napoleon saw that this was not the
same, not at all the same, as what had happened in his former battles. He saw
that what he was feeling was felt by all the men about him experienced in the
art of war. All their faces looked dejected, and they all shunned one another's
eyes—only a de Beausset could fail to grasp the meaning of what was
happening.
But Napoleon with his long experience of war well knew the meaning of a
battle not gained by the attacking side in eight hours, after all efforts had been
expended. He knew that it was a lost battle and that the least accident might
now—with the fight balanced on such a strained center—destroy him and his
army.
When he ran his mind over the whole of this strange Russian campaign in
which not one battle had been won, and in which not a flag, or cannon, or
army corps had been captured in two months, when he looked at the concealed
depression on the faces around him and heard reports of the Russians still
holding their ground—a terrible feeling like a nightmare took possession of
him, and all the unlucky accidents that might destroy him occurred to his
mind. The Russians might fall on his left wing, might break through his center,
he himself might be killed by a stray cannon ball. All this was possible. In
former battles he had only considered the possibilities of success, but now
innumerable unlucky chances presented themselves, and he expected them all.
Yes, it was like a dream in which a man fancies that a ruffian is coming to
attack him, and raises his arm to strike that ruffian a terrible blow which he
knows should annihilate him, but then feels that his arm drops powerless and
limp like a rag, and the horror of unavoidable destruction seizes him in his
helplessness.
The news that the Russians were attacking the left flank of the French army
aroused that horror in Napoleon. He sat silently on a campstool below the
knoll, with head bowed and elbows on his knees. Berthier approached and
suggested that they should ride along the line to ascertain the position of
affairs.
"What? What do you say?" asked Napoleon. "Yes, tell them to bring me my
horse."
He mounted and rode toward Semenovsk.
Amid the powder smoke, slowly dispersing over the whole space through
which Napoleon rode, horses and men were lying in pools of blood, singly or
in heaps. Neither Napoleon nor any of his generals had ever before seen such
horrors or so many slain in such a small area. The roar of guns, that had not
ceased for ten hours, wearied the ear and gave a peculiar significance to the
spectacle, as music does to tableaux vivants. Napoleon rode up the high
ground at Semenovsk, and through the smoke saw ranks of men in uniforms of
a color unfamiliar to him. They were Russians.
The Russians stood in serried ranks behind Semenovsk village and its knoll,
and their guns boomed incessantly along their line and sent forth clouds of
smoke. It was no longer a battle: it was a continuous slaughter which could be
of no avail either to the French or the Russians. Napoleon stopped his horse
and again fell into the reverie from which Berthier had aroused him. He could
not stop what was going on before him and around him and was supposed to
be directed by him and to depend on him, and from its lack of success this
affair, for the first time, seemed to him unnecessary and horrible.
One of the generals rode up to Napoleon and ventured to offer to lead the Old
Guard into action. Ney and Berthier, standing near Napoleon, exchanged looks
and smiled contemptuously at this general's senseless offer.
Napoleon bowed his head and remained silent a long time.
"At eight hundred leagues from France, I will not have my Guard destroyed!"
he said, and turning his horse rode back to Shevardino.
CHAPTER XXXV
On the rug-covered bench where Pierre had seen him in the morning sat
Kutuzov, his gray head hanging, his heavy body relaxed. He gave no orders,
but only assented to or dissented from what others suggested.
"Yes, yes, do that," he replied to various proposals. "Yes, yes: go, dear boy,
and have a look," he would say to one or another of those about him; or, "No,
don't, we'd better wait!" He listened to the reports that were brought him and
gave directions when his subordinates demanded that of him; but when
listening to the reports it seemed as if he were not interested in the import of
the words spoken, but rather in something else—in the expression of face and
tone of voice of those who were reporting. By long years of military
experience he knew, and with the wisdom of age understood, that it is
impossible for one man to direct hundreds of thousands of others struggling
with death, and he knew that the result of a battle is decided not by the orders
of a commander-in-chief, nor the place where the troops are stationed, nor by
the number of cannon or of slaughtered men, but by that intangible force
called the spirit of the army, and he watched this force and guided it in as far
as that was in his power.
Kutuzov's general expression was one of concentrated quiet attention, and his
face wore a strained look as if he found it difficult to master the fatigue of his
old and feeble body.
At eleven o'clock they brought him news that the fleches captured by the
French had been retaken, but that Prince Bagration was wounded. Kutuzov
groaned and swayed his head.
"Ride over to Prince Peter Ivanovich and find out about it exactly," he said to
one of his adjutants, and then turned to the Duke of Wurttemberg who was
standing behind him.
"Will Your Highness please take command of the first army?"
Soon after the duke's departure—before he could possibly have reached
Semenovsk—his adjutant came back from him and told Kutuzov that the duke
asked for more troops.
Kutuzov made a grimace and sent an order to Dokhturov to take over the
command of the first army, and a request to the duke—whom he said he could
not spare at such an important moment—to return to him. When they brought
him news that Murat had been taken prisoner, and the staff officers
congratulated him, Kutuzov smiled.
"Wait a little, gentlemen," said he. "The battle is won, and there is nothing
extraordinary in the capture of Murat. Still, it is better to wait before we
rejoice."
But he sent an adjutant to take the news round the army.
When Scherbinin came galloping from the left flank with news that the French
had captured the fleches and the village of Semenovsk, Kutuzov, guessing by
the sounds of the battle and by Scherbinin's looks that the news was bad, rose
as if to stretch his legs and, taking Scherbinin's arm, led him aside.
"Go, my dear fellow," he said to Ermolov, "and see whether something can't be
done."
Kutuzov was in Gorki, near the center of the Russian position. The attack
directed by Napoleon against our left flank had been several times repulsed. In
the center the French had not got beyond Borodino, and on their left flank
Uvarov's cavalry had put the French to flight.
Toward three o'clock the French attacks ceased. On the faces of all who came
from the field of battle, and of those who stood around him, Kutuzov noticed
an expression of extreme tension. He was satisfied with the day's success—a
success exceeding his expectations, but the old man's strength was failing him.
Several times his head dropped low as if it were falling and he dozed off.
Dinner was brought him.
Adjutant General Wolzogen, the man who when riding past Prince Andrew
had said, "the war should be extended widely," and whom Bagration so
detested, rode up while Kutuzov was at dinner. Wolzogen had come from
Barclay de Tolly to report on the progress of affairs on the left flank. The
sagacious Barclay de Tolly, seeing crowds of wounded men running back and
the disordered rear of the army, weighed all the circumstances, concluded that
the battle was lost, and sent his favorite officer to the commander in chief with
that news.
Kutuzov was chewing a piece of roast chicken with difficulty and glanced at
Wolzogen with eyes that brightened under their puckering lids.
Wolzogen, nonchalantly stretching his legs, approached Kutuzov with a half-
contemptuous smile on his lips, scarcely touching the peak of his cap.
He treated his Serene Highness with a somewhat affected nonchalance
intended to show that, as a highly trained military man, he left it to Russians to
make an idol of this useless old man, but that he knew whom he was dealing
with. "Der alte Herr" (as in their own set the Germans called Kutuzov) "is
making himself very comfortable," thought Wolzogen, and looking severely at
the dishes in front of Kutuzov he began to report to "the old gentleman" the
position of affairs on the left flank as Barclay had ordered him to and as he
himself had seen and understood it.
"All the points of our position are in the enemy's hands and we cannot
dislodge them for lack of troops, the men are running away and it is
impossible to stop them," he reported.
Kutuzov ceased chewing and fixed an astonished gaze on Wolzogen, as if not
understanding what was said to him. Wolzogen, noticing "the old gentleman's"
agitation, said with a smile:
"I have not considered it right to conceal from your Serene Highness what I
have seen. The troops are in complete disorder..."
"You have seen? You have seen?..." Kutuzov shouted. Frowning and rising
quickly, he went up to Wolzogen.
"How... how dare you!..." he shouted, choking and making a threatening
gesture with his trembling arms: "How dare you, sir, say that to me? You know
nothing about it. Tell General Barclay from me that his information is
incorrect and that the real course of the battle is better known to me, the
commander-in-chief, than to him."
Wolzogen was about to make a rejoinder, but Kutuzov interrupted him.
"The enemy has been repulsed on the left and defeated on the right flank. If
you have seen amiss, sir, do not allow yourself to say what you don't know! Be
so good as to ride to General Barclay and inform him of my firm intention to
attack the enemy tomorrow," said Kutuzov sternly.
All were silent, and the only sound audible was the heavy breathing of the
panting old general.
"They are repulsed everywhere, for which I thank God and our brave army!
The enemy is beaten, and tomorrow we shall drive him from the sacred soil of
Russia," said Kutuzov crossing himself, and he suddenly sobbed as his eyes
filled with tears.
Wolzogen, shrugging his shoulders and curling his lips, stepped silently aside,
marveling at "the old gentleman's" conceited stupidity.
"Ah, here he is, my hero!" said Kutuzov to a portly, handsome, dark-haired
general who was just ascending the knoll.
This was Raevski, who had spent the whole day at the most important part of
the field of Borodino.
Raevski reported that the troops were firmly holding their ground and that the
French no longer ventured to attack.
After hearing him, Kutuzov said in French:
"Then you do not think, like some others, that we must retreat?"
"On the contrary, your Highness, in indecisive actions it is always the most
stubborn who remain victors," replied Raevski, "and in my opinion..."
"Kaysarov!" Kutuzov called to his adjutant. "Sit down and write out the order
of the day for tomorrow. And you," he continued, addressing another, "ride
along the line and announce that tomorrow we attack."
While Kutuzov was talking to Raevski and dictating the order of the day,
Wolzogen returned from Barclay and said that General Barclay wished to have
written confirmation of the order the field marshal had given.
Kutuzov, without looking at Wolzogen, gave directions for the order to be
written out which the former commander-in-chief, to avoid personal
responsibility, very judiciously wished to receive.
And by means of that mysterious indefinable bond which maintains
throughout an army one and the same temper, known as "the spirit of the
army," and which constitutes the sinew of war, Kutuzov's words, his order for
a battle next day, immediately became known from one end of the army to the
other.
It was far from being the same words or the same order that reached the
farthest links of that chain. The tales passing from mouth to mouth at different
ends of the army did not even resemble what Kutuzov had said, but the sense
of his words spread everywhere because what he said was not the outcome of
cunning calculations, but of a feeling that lay in the commander-in-chief's soul
as in that of every Russian.
And on learning that tomorrow they were to attack the enemy, and hearing
from the highest quarters a confirmation of what they wanted to believe, the
exhausted, wavering men felt comforted and inspirited.
CHAPTER XXXVI
Prince Andrew's regiment was among the reserves which till after one o'clock
were stationed inactive behind Semenovsk, under heavy artillery fire. Toward
two o'clock the regiment, having already lost more than two hundred men, was
moved forward into a trampled oatfield in the gap between Semenovsk and the
Knoll Battery, where thousands of men perished that day and on which an
intense, concentrated fire from several hundred enemy guns was directed
between one and two o'clock.
Without moving from that spot or firing a single shot the regiment here lost
another third of its men. From in front and especially from the right, in the
unlifting smoke the guns boomed, and out of the mysterious domain of smoke
that overlay the whole space in front, quick hissing cannon balls and slow
whistling shells flew unceasingly. At times, as if to allow them a respite, a
quarter of an hour passed during which the cannon balls and shells all flew
overhead, but sometimes several men were torn from the regiment in a minute
and the slain were continually being dragged away and the wounded carried
off.
With each fresh blow less and less chance of life remained for those not yet
killed. The regiment stood in columns of battalion, three hundred paces apart,
but nevertheless the men were always in one and the same mood. All alike
were taciturn and morose. Talk was rarely heard in the ranks, and it ceased
altogether every time the thud of a successful shot and the cry of "stretchers!"
was heard. Most of the time, by their officers' order, the men sat on the
ground. One, having taken off his shako, carefully loosened the gathers of its
lining and drew them tight again; another, rubbing some dry clay between his
palms, polished his bayonet; another fingered the strap and pulled the buckle
of his bandolier, while another smoothed and refolded his leg bands and put
his boots on again. Some built little houses of the tufts in the plowed ground,
or plaited baskets from the straw in the cornfield. All seemed fully absorbed in
these pursuits. When men were killed or wounded, when rows of stretchers
went past, when some troops retreated, and when great masses of the enemy
came into view through the smoke, no one paid any attention to these things.
But when our artillery or cavalry advanced or some of our infantry were seen
to move forward, words of approval were heard on all sides. But the liveliest
attention was attracted by occurrences quite apart from, and unconnected with,
the battle. It was as if the minds of these morally exhausted men found relief
in everyday, commonplace occurrences. A battery of artillery was passing in
front of the regiment. The horse of an ammunition cart put its leg over a trace.
"Hey, look at the trace horse!... Get her leg out! She'll fall.... Ah, they don't see
it!" came identical shouts from the ranks all along the regiment. Another time,
general attention was attracted by a small brown dog, coming heaven knows
whence, which trotted in a preoccupied manner in front of the ranks with tail
stiffly erect till suddenly a shell fell close by, when it yelped, tucked its tail
between its legs, and darted aside. Yells and shrieks of laughter rose from the
whole regiment. But such distractions lasted only a moment, and for eight
hours the men had been inactive, without food, in constant fear of death, and
their pale and gloomy faces grew ever paler and gloomier.
Prince Andrew, pale and gloomy like everyone in the regiment, paced up and
down from the border of one patch to another, at the edge of the meadow
beside an oatfield, with head bowed and arms behind his back. There was
nothing for him to do and no orders to be given. Everything went on of itself.
The killed were dragged from the front, the wounded carried away, and the
ranks closed up. If any soldiers ran to the rear they returned immediately and
hastily. At first Prince Andrew, considering it his duty to rouse the courage of
the men and to set them an example, walked about among the ranks, but he
soon became convinced that this was unnecessary and that there was nothing
he could teach them. All the powers of his soul, as of every soldier there, were
unconsciously bent on avoiding the contemplation of the horrors of their
situation. He walked along the meadow, dragging his feet, rustling the grass,
and gazing at the dust that covered his boots; now he took big strides trying to
keep to the footprints left on the meadow by the mowers, then he counted his
steps, calculating how often he must walk from one strip to another to walk a
mile, then he stripped the flowers from the wormwood that grew along a
boundary rut, rubbed them in his palms, and smelled their pungent, sweetly
bitter scent. Nothing remained of the previous day's thoughts. He thought of
nothing. He listened with weary ears to the ever-recurring sounds,
distinguishing the whistle of flying projectiles from the booming of the
reports, glanced at the tiresomely familiar faces of the men of the first
battalion, and waited. "Here it comes... this one is coming our way again!" he
thought, listening to an approaching whistle in the hidden region of smoke.
"One, another! Again! It has hit...." He stopped and looked at the ranks. "No, it
has gone over. But this one has hit!" And again he started trying to reach the
boundary strip in sixteen paces. A whizz and a thud! Five paces from him, a
cannon ball tore up the dry earth and disappeared. A chill ran down his back.
Again he glanced at the ranks. Probably many had been hit—a large crowd
had gathered near the second battalion.
"Adjutant!" he shouted. "Order them not to crowd together."
The adjutant, having obeyed this instruction, approached Prince Andrew. From
the other side a battalion commander rode up.
"Look out!" came a frightened cry from a soldier and, like a bird whirring in
rapid flight and alighting on the ground, a shell dropped with little noise
within two steps of Prince Andrew and close to the battalion commander's
horse. The horse first, regardless of whether it was right or wrong to show
fear, snorted, reared almost throwing the major, and galloped aside. The
horse's terror infected the men.
"Lie down!" cried the adjutant, throwing himself flat on the ground.
Prince Andrew hesitated. The smoking shell spun like a top between him and
the prostrate adjutant, near a wormwood plant between the field and the
meadow.
"Can this be death?" thought Prince Andrew, looking with a quite new,
envious glance at the grass, the wormwood, and the streamlet of smoke that
curled up from the rotating black ball. "I cannot, I do not wish to die. I love
life—I love this grass, this earth, this air...." He thought this, and at the same
time remembered that people were looking at him.
"It's shameful, sir!" he said to the adjutant. "What..."
He did not finish speaking. At one and the same moment came the sound of an
explosion, a whistle of splinters as from a breaking window frame, a
suffocating smell of powder, and Prince Andrew started to one side, raising his
arm, and fell on his chest. Several officers ran up to him. From the right side
of his abdomen, blood was welling out making a large stain on the grass.
The militiamen with stretchers who were called up stood behind the officers.
Prince Andrew lay on his chest with his face in the grass, breathing heavily
and noisily.
"What are you waiting for? Come along!"
The peasants went up and took him by his shoulders and legs, but he moaned
piteously and, exchanging looks, they set him down again.
"Pick him up, lift him, it's all the same!" cried someone.
They again took him by the shoulders and laid him on the stretcher.
"Ah, God! My God! What is it? The stomach? That means death! My God!"—
voices among the officers were heard saying.
"It flew a hair's breadth past my ear," said the adjutant.
The peasants, adjusting the stretcher to their shoulders, started hurriedly along
the path they had trodden down, to the dressing station.
"Keep in step! Ah... those peasants!" shouted an officer, seizing by their
shoulders and checking the peasants, who were walking unevenly and jolting
the stretcher.
"Get into step, Fedor... I say, Fedor!" said the foremost peasant.
"Now that's right!" said the one behind joyfully, when he had got into step.
"Your excellency! Eh, Prince!" said the trembling voice of Timokhin, who had
run up and was looking down on the stretcher.
Prince Andrew opened his eyes and looked up at the speaker from the
stretcher into which his head had sunk deep and again his eyelids drooped.
The militiamen carried Prince Andrew to the dressing station by the wood,
where wagons were stationed. The dressing station consisted of three tents
with flaps turned back, pitched at the edge of a birch wood. In the wood,
wagons and horses were standing. The horses were eating oats from their
movable troughs and sparrows flew down and pecked the grains that fell.
Some crows, scenting blood, flew among the birch trees cawing impatiently.
Around the tents, over more than five acres, bloodstained men in various garbs
stood, sat, or lay. Around the wounded stood crowds of soldier stretcher-bearers with dismal and attentive faces, whom the officers keeping order tried
in vain to drive from the spot. Disregarding the officers' orders, the soldiers
stood leaning against their stretchers and gazing intently, as if trying to
comprehend the difficult problem of what was taking place before them. From
the tents came now loud angry cries and now plaintive groans. Occasionally
dressers ran out to fetch water, or to point out those who were to be brought in
next. The wounded men awaiting their turn outside the tents groaned, sighed,
wept, screamed, swore, or asked for vodka. Some were delirious. Prince
Andrew's bearers, stepping over the wounded who had not yet been bandaged,
took him, as a regimental commander, close up to one of the tents and there
stopped, awaiting instructions. Prince Andrew opened his eyes and for a long
time could not make out what was going on around him. He remembered the
meadow, the wormwood, the field, the whirling black ball, and his sudden rush
of passionate love of life. Two steps from him, leaning against a branch and
talking loudly and attracting general attention, stood a tall, handsome, black-
haired noncommissioned officer with a bandaged head. He had been wounded
in the head and leg by bullets. Around him, eagerly listening to his talk, a
crowd of wounded and stretcher-bearers was gathered.
"We kicked him out from there so that he chucked everything, we grabbed the
King himself!" cried he, looking around him with eyes that glittered with
fever. "If only reserves had come up just then, lads, there wouldn't have been
nothing left of him! I tell you surely..."
Like all the others near the speaker, Prince Andrew looked at him with shining
eyes and experienced a sense of comfort. "But isn't it all the same now?"
thought he. "And what will be there, and what has there been here? Why was I
so reluctant to part with life? There was something in this life I did not and do
not understand."
CHAPTER XXXVII
One of the doctors came out of the tent in a bloodstained apron, holding a
cigar between the thumb and little finger of one of his small bloodstained
hands, so as not to smear it. He raised his head and looked about him, but
above the level of the wounded men. He evidently wanted a little respite. After
turning his head from right to left for some time, he sighed and looked down.
"All right, immediately," he replied to a dresser who pointed Prince Andrew
out to him, and he told them to carry him into the tent.
Murmurs arose among the wounded who were waiting.
"It seems that even in the next world only the gentry are to have a chance!"
remarked one.
Prince Andrew was carried in and laid on a table that had only just been
cleared and which a dresser was washing down. Prince Andrew could not
make out distinctly what was in that tent. The pitiful groans from all sides and
the torturing pain in his thigh, stomach, and back distracted him. All he saw
about him merged into a general impression of naked, bleeding human bodies
that seemed to fill the whole of the low tent, as a few weeks previously, on that
hot August day, such bodies had filled the dirty pond beside the Smolensk
road. Yes, it was the same flesh, the same chair a canon, the sight of which had
even then filled him with horror, as by a presentiment.
There were three operating tables in the tent. Two were occupied, and on the
third they placed Prince Andrew. For a little while he was left alone and
involuntarily witnessed what was taking place on the other two tables. On the
nearest one sat a Tartar, probably a Cossack, judging by the uniform thrown
down beside him. Four soldiers were holding him, and a spectacled doctor was
cutting into his muscular brown back.
"Ooh, ooh, ooh!" grunted the Tartar, and suddenly lifting up his swarthy snub-
nosed face with its high cheekbones, and baring his white teeth, he began to
wriggle and twitch his body and utter piercing, ringing, and prolonged yells.
On the other table, round which many people were crowding, a tall well-fed
man lay on his back with his head thrown back. His curly hair, its color, and
the shape of his head seemed strangely familiar to Prince Andrew. Several
dressers were pressing on his chest to hold him down. One large, white, plump
leg twitched rapidly all the time with a feverish tremor. The man was sobbing
and choking convulsively. Two doctors—one of whom was pale and trembling
—were silently doing something to this man's other, gory leg. When he had
finished with the Tartar, whom they covered with an overcoat, the spectacled
doctor came up to Prince Andrew, wiping his hands.
He glanced at Prince Andrew's face and quickly turned away.
"Undress him! What are you waiting for?" he cried angrily to the dressers.
His very first, remotest recollections of childhood came back to Prince
Andrew's mind when the dresser with sleeves rolled up began hastily to undo
the buttons of his clothes and undressed him. The doctor bent down over the
wound, felt it, and sighed deeply. Then he made a sign to someone, and the
torturing pain in his abdomen caused Prince Andrew to lose consciousness.
When he came to himself the splintered portions of his thighbone had been
extracted, the torn flesh cut away, and the wound bandaged. Water was being
sprinkled on his face. As soon as Prince Andrew opened his eyes, the doctor
bent over, kissed him silently on the lips, and hurried away.
After the sufferings he had been enduring, Prince Andrew enjoyed a blissful
feeling such as he had not experienced for a long time. All the best and
happiest moments of his life—especially his earliest childhood, when he used
to be undressed and put to bed, and when leaning over him his nurse sang him
to sleep and he, burying his head in the pillow, felt happy in the mere
consciousness of life—returned to his memory, not merely as something past
but as something present.
The doctors were busily engaged with the wounded man the shape of whose
head seemed familiar to Prince Andrew: they were lifting him up and trying to
quiet him.
"Show it to me.... Oh, ooh... Oh! Oh, ooh!" his frightened moans could be
heard, subdued by suffering and broken by sobs.
Hearing those moans Prince Andrew wanted to weep. Whether because he was
dying without glory, or because he was sorry to part with life, or because of
those memories of a childhood that could not return, or because he was
suffering and others were suffering and that man near him was groaning so
piteously—he felt like weeping childlike, kindly, and almost happy tears.
The wounded man was shown his amputated leg stained with clotted blood
and with the boot still on.
"Oh! Oh, ooh!" he sobbed, like a woman.
The doctor who had been standing beside him, preventing Prince Andrew
from seeing his face, moved away.
"My God! What is this? Why is he here?" said Prince Andrew to himself.
In the miserable, sobbing, enfeebled man whose leg had just been amputated,
he recognized Anatole Kuragin. Men were supporting him in their arms and
offering him a glass of water, but his trembling, swollen lips could not grasp
its rim. Anatole was sobbing painfully. "Yes, it is he! Yes, that man is
somehow closely and painfully connected with me," thought Prince Andrew,
not yet clearly grasping what he saw before him. "What is the connection of
that man with my childhood and life?" he asked himself without finding an
answer. And suddenly a new unexpected memory from that realm of pure and
loving childhood presented itself to him. He remembered Natasha as he had
seen her for the first time at the ball in 1810, with her slender neck and arms
and with a frightened happy face ready for rapture, and love and tenderness for
her, stronger and more vivid than ever, awoke in his soul. He now remembered
the connection that existed between himself and this man who was dimly
gazing at him through tears that filled his swollen eyes. He remembered
everything, and ecstatic pity and love for that man overflowed his happy heart.
Prince Andrew could no longer restrain himself and wept tender loving tears
for his fellow men, for himself, and for his own and their errors.
"Compassion, love of our brothers, for those who love us and for those who
hate us, love of our enemies; yes, that love which God preached on earth and
which Princess Mary taught me and I did not understand—that is what made
me sorry to part with life, that is what remained for me had I lived. But now it
is too late. I know it!"
CHAPTER XXXVIII
The terrible spectacle of the battlefield covered with dead and wounded,
together with the heaviness of his head and the news that some twenty
generals he knew personally had been killed or wounded, and the
consciousness of the impotence of his once mighty arm, produced an
unexpected impression on Napoleon who usually liked to look at the killed
and wounded, thereby, he considered, testing his strength of mind. This day
the horrible appearance of the battlefield overcame that strength of mind
which he thought constituted his merit and his greatness. He rode hurriedly
from the battlefield and returned to the Shevardino knoll, where he sat on his
campstool, his sallow face swollen and heavy, his eyes dim, his nose red, and
his voice hoarse, involuntarily listening, with downcast eyes, to the sounds of
firing. With painful dejection he awaited the end of this action, in which he
regarded himself as a participant and which he was unable to arrest. A
personal, human feeling for a brief moment got the better of the artificial
phantasm of life he had served so long. He felt in his own person the
sufferings and death he had witnessed on the battlefield. The heaviness of his
head and chest reminded him of the possibility of suffering and death for
himself. At that moment he did not desire Moscow, or victory, or glory (what
need had he for any more glory?). The one thing he wished for was rest,
tranquillity, and freedom. But when he had been on the Semenovsk heights the
artillery commander had proposed to him to bring several batteries of artillery
up to those heights to strengthen the fire on the Russian troops crowded in
front of Knyazkovo. Napoleon had assented and had given orders that news
should be brought to him of the effect those batteries produced.
An adjutant came now to inform him that the fire of two hundred guns had
been concentrated on the Russians, as he had ordered, but that they still held
their ground.
"Our fire is mowing them down by rows, but still they hold on," said the
adjutant.
"They want more!..." said Napoleon in a hoarse voice.
"Sire?" asked the adjutant who had not heard the remark.
"They want more!" croaked Napoleon frowning. "Let them have it!"
Even before he gave that order the thing he did not desire, and for which he
gave the order only because he thought it was expected of him, was being
done. And he fell back into that artificial realm of imaginary greatness, and
again—as a horse walking a treadmill thinks it is doing something for itself—
he submissively fulfilled the cruel, sad, gloomy, and inhuman role predestined
for him.
And not for that day and hour alone were the mind and conscience darkened of
this man on whom the responsibility for what was happening lay more than on
all the others who took part in it. Never to the end of his life could he
understand goodness, beauty, or truth, or the significance of his actions which
were too contrary to goodness and truth, too remote from everything human,
for him ever to be able to grasp their meaning. He could not disavow his
actions, belauded as they were by half the world, and so he had to repudiate
truth, goodness, and all humanity.
Not only on that day, as he rode over the battlefield strewn with men killed
and maimed (by his will as he believed), did he reckon as he looked at them
how many Russians there were for each Frenchman and, deceiving himself,
find reason for rejoicing in the calculation that there were five Russians for
every Frenchman. Not on that day alone did he write in a letter to Paris that
"the battle field was superb," because fifty thousand corpses lay there, but
even on the island of St. Helena in the peaceful solitude where he said he
intended to devote his leisure to an account of the great deeds he had done, he
wrote:
The Russian war should have been the most popular war of modern times: it
was a war of good sense, for real interests, for the tranquillity and security of
all; it was purely pacific and conservative.
It was a war for a great cause, the end of uncertainties and the beginning of
security. A new horizon and new labors were opening out, full of well-being
and prosperity for all. The European system was already founded; all that
remained was to organize it.
Satisfied on these great points and with tranquility everywhere, I too should
have had my Congress and my Holy Alliance. Those ideas were stolen from
me. In that reunion of great sovereigns we should have discussed our interests
like one family, and have rendered account to the peoples as clerk to master.
Europe would in this way soon have been, in fact, but one people, and anyone
who traveled anywhere would have found himself always in the common
fatherland. I should have demanded the freedom of all navigable rivers for
everybody, that the seas should be common to all, and that the great standing
armies should be reduced henceforth to mere guards for the sovereigns.
On returning to France, to the bosom of the great, strong, magnificent,
peaceful, and glorious fatherland, I should have proclaimed her frontiers
immutable; all future wars purely defensive, all aggrandizement antinational. I
should have associated my son in the Empire; my dictatorship would have
been finished, and his constitutional reign would have begun.
Paris would have been the capital of the world, and the French the envy of the
nations!
My leisure then, and my old age, would have been devoted, in company with
the Empress and during the royal apprenticeship of my son, to leisurely
visiting, with our own horses and like a true country couple, every corner of
the Empire, receiving complaints, redressing wrongs, and scattering public
buildings and benefactions on all sides and everywhere.
Napoleon, predestined by Providence for the gloomy role of executioner of the
peoples, assured himself that the aim of his actions had been the peoples'
welfare and that he could control the fate of millions and by the employment
of power confer benefactions.
"Of four hundred thousand who crossed the Vistula," he wrote further of the
Russian war, "half were Austrians, Prussians, Saxons, Poles, Bavarians,
Wurttembergers, Mecklenburgers, Spaniards, Italians, and Neapolitans. The
Imperial army, strictly speaking, was one third composed of Dutch, Belgians,
men from the borders of the Rhine, Piedmontese, Swiss, Genevese, Tuscans,
Romans, inhabitants of the Thirty-second Military Division, of Bremen, of
Hamburg, and so on: it included scarcely a hundred and forty thousand who
spoke French. The Russian expedition actually cost France less than fifty
thousand men; the Russian army in its retreat from Vilna to Moscow lost in the
various battles four times more men than the French army; the burning of
Moscow cost the lives of a hundred thousand Russians who died of cold and
want in the woods; finally, in its march from Moscow to the Oder the Russian
army also suffered from the severity of the season; so that by the time it
reached Vilna it numbered only fifty thousand, and at Kalisch less than
eighteen thousand."
He imagined that the war with Russia came about by his will, and the horrors
that occurred did not stagger his soul. He boldly took the whole responsibility
for what happened, and his darkened mind found justification in the belief that
among the hundreds of thousands who perished there were fewer Frenchmen
than Hessians and Bavarians.
CHAPTER XXXIX
Several tens of thousands of the slain lay in diverse postures and various
uniforms on the fields and meadows belonging to the Davydov family and to
the crown serfs—those fields and meadows where for hundreds of years the
peasants of Borodino, Gorki, Shevardino, and Semenovsk had reaped their
harvests and pastured their cattle. At the dressing stations the grass and earth
were soaked with blood for a space of some three acres around. Crowds of
men of various arms, wounded and unwounded, with frightened faces,
dragged themselves back to Mozhaysk from the one army and back to Valuevo
from the other. Other crowds, exhausted and hungry, went forward led by their
officers. Others held their ground and continued to fire.
Over the whole field, previously so gaily beautiful with the glitter of bayonets
and cloudlets of smoke in the morning sun, there now spread a mist of damp
and smoke and a strange acid smell of saltpeter and blood. Clouds gathered
and drops of rain began to fall on the dead and wounded, on the frightened,
exhausted, and hesitating men, as if to say: "Enough, men! Enough! Cease...
bethink yourselves! What are you doing?"
To the men of both sides alike, worn out by want of food and rest, it began
equally to appear doubtful whether they should continue to slaughter one
another; all the faces expressed hesitation, and the question arose in every
soul: "For what, for whom, must I kill and be killed?... You may go and kill
whom you please, but I don't want to do so anymore!" By evening this thought
had ripened in every soul. At any moment these men might have been seized
with horror at what they were doing and might have thrown up everything and
run away anywhere.
But though toward the end of the battle the men felt all the horror of what they
were doing, though they would have been glad to leave off, some
incomprehensible, mysterious power continued to control them, and they still
brought up the charges, loaded, aimed, and applied the match, though only one
artilleryman survived out of every three, and though they stumbled and panted
with fatigue, perspiring and stained with blood and powder. The cannon balls
flew just as swiftly and cruelly from both sides, crushing human bodies, and
that terrible work which was not done by the will of a man but at the will of
Him who governs men and worlds continued.
Anyone looking at the disorganized rear of the Russian army would have said
that, if only the French made one more slight effort, it would disappear; and
anyone looking at the rear of the French army would have said that the
Russians need only make one more slight effort and the French would be
destroyed. But neither the French nor the Russians made that effort, and the
flame of battle burned slowly out.
The Russians did not make that effort because they were not attacking the
French. At the beginning of the battle they stood blocking the way to Moscow
and they still did so at the end of the battle as at the beginning. But even had
the aim of the Russians been to drive the French from their positions, they
could not have made this last effort, for all the Russian troops had been broken
up, there was no part of the Russian army that had not suffered in the battle,
and though still holding their positions they had lost ONE HALF of their
army.
The French, with the memory of all their former victories during fifteen years,
with the assurance of Napoleon's invincibility, with the consciousness that
they had captured part of the battlefield and had lost only a quarter of their
men and still had their Guards intact, twenty thousand strong, might easily
have made that effort. The French who had attacked the Russian army in order
to drive it from its position ought to have made that effort, for as long as the
Russians continued to block the road to Moscow as before, the aim of the
French had not been attained and all their efforts and losses were in vain. But
the French did not make that effort. Some historians say that Napoleon need
only have used his Old Guards, who were intact, and the battle would have
been won. To speak of what would have happened had Napoleon sent his
Guards is like talking of what would happen if autumn became spring. It could
not be. Napoleon did not give his Guards, not because he did not want to, but
because it could not be done. All the generals, officers, and soldiers of the
French army knew it could not be done, because the flagging spirit of the
troops would not permit it.
It was not Napoleon alone who had experienced that nightmare feeling of the
mighty arm being stricken powerless, but all the generals and soldiers of his
army whether they had taken part in the battle or not, after all their experience
of previous battles—when after one tenth of such efforts the enemy had fled—
experienced a similar feeling of terror before an enemy who, after losing
HALF his men, stood as threateningly at the end as at the beginning of the
battle. The moral force of the attacking French army was exhausted. Not that
sort of victory which is defined by the capture of pieces of material fastened to
sticks, called standards, and of the ground on which the troops had stood and
were standing, but a moral victory that convinces the enemy of the moral
superiority of his opponent and of his own impotence was gained by the
Russians at Borodino. The French invaders, like an infuriated animal that has
in its onslaught received a mortal wound, felt that they were perishing, but
could not stop, any more than the Russian army, weaker by one half, could
help swerving. By impetus gained, the French army was still able to roll
forward to Moscow, but there, without further effort on the part of the
Russians, it had to perish, bleeding from the mortal wound it had received at
Borodino. The direct consequence of the battle of Borodino was Napoleon's
senseless flight from Moscow, his retreat along the old Smolensk road, the
destruction of the invading army of five hundred thousand men, and the
downfall of Napoleonic France, on which at Borodino for the first time the
hand of an opponent of stronger spirit had been laid.