Dearest Father,
You asked me recently why I maintain that I am afraid of you. As usual, I was unable to think of any answer to your
question, partly for the very reason that I am afraid of you, and partly because an explanation of the grounds for this fear
would mean going into far more details than I could even approximately keep in mind while talking. And if I now try to give
you an answer in writing, it will still be very incomplete, because, even in writing, this fear and its consequences hamper
me in relation to you and because the magnitude of the subject goes far beyond the scope of my memory and power of
reasoning, to you the matter always seemed very simple, at least in so far as you talked about it in front of me, and
indiscriminately in front of many other people. It looked to you more or less as follows: you have worked hard all your life,
have sacrificed everything for your children, above all for me, consequently I have lived high and handsome, have been
completely at liberty to learn whatever I wanted, and have had no cause for material worries, which means worries of any
kind at all. You have not expected any gratitude for this, knowing what "children's gratitude" is like, but have expected at
least some sort of obligingness, some sign of sympathy. Instead I have always hidden from you, in my room, among my
books, with crazy friends, or with crackpot ideas. I have never talked to you frankly; I have never come to you when you
were in the synagogue, never visited you at Franzensbad, nor indeed ever shown any family feeling; I have never taken
any interest in the business or your other concerns; I saddled you with the factory and walked off; I encouraged Ottla in
her obstinacy, and never lifted a finger for you (never even got you a theater ticket), while I do everything for my friends.
If you sum up your judgment of me, the result you get is that, although you don't charge me with anything downright
improper or wicked (with the exception perhaps of my latest marriage plan), you do charge me with coldness,
estrangements and ingratitude. And, what is more, you charge me with it in such a way as to make it seem my fault, as
though I might have been able, with something like a touch on the steering wheel, to make everything quite different, while
you aren't in the slightest to blame, unless it be for having been too good to me.
This, your usual way of representing it, I regard as accurate only in so far as I too believe you are entirely blameless in the
matter of our estrangement. But I am equally entirely blameless. If I could get you to acknowledge this, then what would
be possible is—not, I think, a new life, we are both much too old for that—but still, a kind of peace; no cessation, but still,
a diminution of your unceasing reproaches.
Oddly enough you have some sort of notion of what I mean. For instance, a short time ago you said to me: "I have always
been fond of you, even though outwardly I didn't act toward you as other fathers generally do, and this precisely because I
can't pretend as other people can." Now, Father, on the whole I have never doubted your goodness toward me, but this
remark I consider wrong. You can't pretend, that is true, but merely for that reason to maintain that other fathers pretend
is either mere opinionated nests, and as such beyond discussion, or on the other hand—and this in my view is what it really
is—a veiled expression of the fact that something is wrong in our relationship and that you have played your part in causing
it to be so, but without its being your fault. If you really mean that, then we are in agreement.
I'm not going to say, of course, that I have become what I am only as a result of your influence. That would be very much
exaggerated (and I am indeed inclined to this exaggeration). It is indeed quite possible that even if I had grown up entirely
free from your influence I still could not have become a person after your own heart. I should probably have still become a
weakly, timid, hesitant, restless person, neither Robert Kafka nor Karl Hermann, but yet quite different from what I really
am, and we might have got on with each other excellently. I should have been happy to have you as a friend, as a boss, an
uncle, a grandfather, even (though rather more hesitantly) as a father-in-law. Only as a father you have been too strong
for me, particularly since my brothers died when they were small and my sisters came along only much later, so that I
alone had to bear the brunt of it—and for that I was much too weak.
Compare the Twoof us: I, to put it in a very much abbreviated form, a Löwy with a certain Kafka component, which,
however, is not set in motion by the Kafka will to life, business, and conquest, but by a Löwyish spur that impels more
secretly, more diffidently, and in another direction, and which often fails to work entirely. You, on the other hand, a true
Kafka in strength, health, appetite, loudness of voice, eloquence, self-satisfaction, worldly dominance, endurance, presence
of mind, knowledge of human nature, a certain way of doing things on a grand scale, of course also with all the defects
and weaknesses that go with these advantages and into which your temperament and sometimes your hot temper drive
you. You are perhaps not wholly a Kafka in your general outlook, in so far as I can compare you with Uncle Philipp, Ludwig,
and Heinrich. That is odd, and here I don't see quite clear either. After all, they were all more cheerful, fresher, more
informal, more easygoing, less severe than you. (In this, by the way, I have inherited a great deal from you and taken
much too good care of my inheritance, without, admittedly, having the necessary counterweights in my own nature, as you
have.) Yet you too, on the other hand, have in this respect gone through various phases. You were perhaps more cheerful
before you were disappointed by your children, especially by me, and were depressed at home (when other people came
in, you were quite different); perhaps you have become more cheerful again since then, now that your grandchildren and
your son-in-law again give you something of that warmth which your children, except perhaps Valli, could not give you. In
any case, we were so different and in our difference so dangerous to each other that if anyone had tried to calculate in
advance how I, the slowly developing child, and you, the full-grown man, would behave toward one another, he could have
assumed that you would simply trample me underfoot so that nothing was left of me. Well, that did not happen. Nothing
alive can be calculated. But perhaps something worse happened. And in saying this I would all the time beg of you not to
forget that I never, and not even for a single moment believe any guilt to be on your side. The effect you had on me was
the effect you could not help having. But you should stop considering it some particular malice on my part that I succumbed
to that effect.
I was a timid child. For all that, I am sure I was also obstinate, as children are. I am sure that Mother spoiled me too, but
I cannot believe I was particularly difficult to manage; I cannot believe that a kindly word, a quiet taking by the hand, a
friendly look, could not have got me to do anything that was wanted of me. Now you are, after all, basically a charitable
and kindhearted person (what follows will not be in contradiction to this, I am speaking only of the impression you made on
the child), but not every child has the endurance and fearlessness to go on searching until it comes to the kindliness that
lies beneath the surface. You can treat a child only in the way you yourself are constituted, with vigor, noise, and hot
temper, and in this case such behavior seemed to you to be also most appropriate because you wanted to bring me up to
be a strong, brave boy.
Your educational methods in the very early years I can't, of course, directly describe today, but I can more or less imagine
them by drawing conclusions from the later years and from your treatment of Felix. What must be considered as
heightening the effect is that you were then younger and hence more energetic, wilder, more primitive, and still more
reckless than you are today and that you were, besides, completely tied to the business, scarcely able to be with me even
once a day, and therefore made all the more profound impression on me, one that never really leveled out to the flatness
of habit.
There is only one episode in the early years of which I have a direct memory. You may remember it, too. One night I kept
on whimpering for water, not, I am certain, because I was thirsty, but probably partly to be annoying, partly to amuse
myself. After several vigorous threats had failed to have any effect, you took me out of bed, carried me out onto the
pavlatche,* and left me there alone for a while in my nightshirt, outside the shut door. I am not going to say that this was
wrong—perhaps there was really no other way of getting peace and quiet that night—but I mention it as typical of your
methods of bringing up a child and their effect on me. I dare say I was quite obedient afterward at that period, but it did
me inner harm. What was for me a matter of course, that senseless asking for water, and then the extraordinary terror of
being carried outside were Twothings that I, my nature being what it was, could never properly connect with each other.
Even years afterward I suffered from the tormenting fancy that the huge man, my father, the ultimate authority, would
come almost for no reason at all and take me out of bed in the night and carry me out onto the pavlatche, and that
consequently I meant absolutely nothing as far as he was concerned.
*Pavlatche is the Czech word for the long balcony in the inner courtyard of old houses in Prague. (Ed.)
That was only a small beginning, but this feeling of being nothing that often dominates me (a feeling that is in another
respect, admittedly, also a noble and fruitful one) comes largely from your influence. What I would have needed was a
little encouragement, a little friendliness, a little keeping open of my road, instead of which you blocked it for me, though of
course with the good intention of making me take another road. But I was not fit for that. You encouraged me, for
instance, when I saluted and marched smartly, but I was no future soldier, or you encouraged me when I was able to eat
heartily or even drink beer with my meals, or when I was able to repeat songs, singing what I had not understood, or
prattle to you using your own favorite expressions, imitating you, but nothing of this had anything to do with my future. And
it is characteristic that even today you really only encourage me in anything when you yourself are involved in it, when
what is at stake is your own sense of self-importance, which I damage (for instance by my intended marriage) or which is
damaged in me (for instance when Pepa is abusive to me). Then I receive encouragement, I am reminded of my worth,
the matches I would be entitled to make are pointed out to me, and Pepa is condemned utterly. But apart from the fact
that at my age I am already nearly unsusceptible to encouragement, what help could it be to me anyway, if it only comes
when it isn't primarily a matter of myself at all?
At that time, and at that time in every way, I would have needed encouragement. I was, after all, weighed down by your
mere physical presence. I remember, for instance, how we often undressed in the same bathing hut. There was I, skinny,
weakly, slight; you strong, tall, broad. Even inside the hut I felt a miserable specimen, and what's more, not only in your
eyes but in the eyes of the whole world, for you were for me the measure of all things. But then when we stepped out of
the bathing hut before the people, you holding me by my hand, a little skeleton, unsteady, barefoot on the boards,
frightened of the water, incapable of copying your swimming strokes, which you, with the best of intentions, but actually to
my profound humiliation, kept on demonstrating, then I was frantic with desperation and at such moments all my bad
experiences in all areas, fitted magnificently together. I felt best when you sometimes undressed first and I was able to
stay behind in the hut alone and put off the disgrace of showing myself in public until at last you came to see what I was
doing and drove me out of the hut. I was grateful to you for not seeming to notice my anguish, and besides, I was proud of
my father's body. By the way, this difference between us remains much the same to this very day.
In keeping, furthermore, was your intellectual domination. You had worked your way so far up by your own energies alone,
and as a result you had unbounded confidence in your opinion. That was not yet so dazzling for me, a child as later for the
boy growing up. From your armchair you ruled the world. Your opinion was correct, every other was mad, wild, meshugge,
not normal. Your self-confidence indeed was so great that you had no need to be consistent at all and yet never ceased to
be in the right. It did sometimes happen that you had no opinions whatsoever about a matter and as a result every
conceivable opinion with respect to the matter was necessarily wrong, without exception. You were capable, for instance,
of running down the Czechs, and then the Germans, and then the Jews, and what is more, not only selectively but in every
respect, and finally nobody was left except yourself. For me you took on the enigmatic quality that all tyrants have whose
rights are based on their person and not on reason. At least so it seemed to me.
Now, when I was the subject you were actually astonishingly often right; which in conversation was not surprising, for
there was hardly ever any conversation between us, but also in reality. Yet this was nothing particularly incomprehensible,
either; in all my thinking I was, after all, under the heavy pressure of your personality, even in that part of it—and
particularly in that—which was not in accord with yours. All these thoughts, seemingly independent of you, were from the
beginning burdened with your belittling judgments; it was almost impossible to endure this and still work out a thought with
any measure of completeness and permanence. I am not here speaking of any sublime thoughts, but of every little
childhood enterprise. It was only necessary to be happy about something or other, to be filled with the thought of it, to
come home and speak of it, and the answer was an ironic sigh, a shaking of the head, a tapping on the table with a finger:
"Is that all you're so worked up about?" or "Such worries I'd like to have!" or "The things some people have time to think
about!" or "Where is that going to get you?" or "What a song and dance about nothing!" Of course, you couldn't be
expected to be enthusiastic about every childish triviality when you were in a state of vexation and worry. But that was not
the point. Rather, by virtue of your antagonistic nature, you could not help but always and inevitably cause the child such
disappointments; and further, this antagonism, accumulating material, was constantly intensified; eventually the pattern
expressed itself even if, for once, you were of the same opinion as I; finally, these disappointments of the child were not
the ordinary disappointments of life but, since they involved you, the all-important personage, they struck to the very core.
Courage, resolution, confidence, delight in this and that, could not last when you were against it or even if your opposition
was merely to be assumed; and it was to be assumed in almost everything I did.
This applied to people as well as to thoughts. It was enough that I should take a little interest in a person—which in any
case did not happen often, as a result of my nature—for you, without any consideration for my feelings or respect for my
judgment, to move in with abuse, defamation, and denigration. Innocent, childlike people, such as, for instance, the Yiddish
actor Löwy, had to pay for that. Without knowing him you compared him, in some dreadful way that I have now forgotten,
to vermin and, as was so often the case with people I was fond of, you were automatically ready with the proverb of the
dog and its fleas. Here I particularly recall the actor because at that time I made a note of your pronouncements about
him, with the comment: "This is how my father speaks of my friend (whom he does not even know), simply because he is
my friend. I shall always be able to bring this up against him whenever he reproaches me with the lack of a child's
affection and gratitude." What was always incomprehensible to me was your total lack of feeling for the suffering and
shame you could inflict on me with your words and judgments. It was as though you had no notion of your power. I too, I
am sure, often hurt you with what I said, but then I always knew, and it pained me, but I could not control myself, could
not keep the words back, I was sorry even while I was saying them. But you struck out with your words without much ado,
you weren't sorry for anyone, either during or afterward, one was utterly defenseless against you.
But your whole method of upbringing was like that. You have, I think, a gift for bringing up children; you could, I am sure,
have been of help to a human being of your own kind with your methods; such a person would have seen the
reasonableness of what you told him, would not have troubled about anything else, and would quietly have done things the
way he was told. But for me as a child everything you called out to me was positively a heavenly commandment, I never
forgot it, it remained for me the most important means of forming a judgment of the world, above all of forming a
judgment of you yourself, and there you failed entirely. Since as a child I was with you chiefly during meals, your teaching
was to a large extent the teaching of proper behavior at table. What was brought to the table had to be eaten, the quality
of the food was not to be discussed—but you yourself often found the food inedible, called it "this swill," said "that cow"
(the cook) had ruined it. Because in accordance with your strong appetite and your particular predilection you ate
everything fast, hot, and in big mouthfuls, the child had to hurry; there was a somber silence at table, interrupted by
admonitions: "Eat first, talk afterward," or "faster, faster, faster," or "There you are, you see, I finished ages ago." Bones
mustn't be cracked with the teeth, but you could. Vinegar must not be sipped noisily, but you could. The main thing was
that the bread should be cut straight. But it didn't matter that you did it with a knife dripping with gravy. Care had to be
taken that no scraps fell on the floor. In the end it was under your chair that there were the most scraps. At table one
wasn't allowed to do anything but eat, but you cleaned and cut your fingernails, sharpened pencils, cleaned your ears with
a toothpick. Please, Father, understand me correctly: in themselves these would have been utterly insignificant details, they
only became depressing for me because you, so tremendously the authoritative man, did not keep the commandments you
imposed on me. Hence the world was for me divided into three parts: one in which I, the slave, lived under laws that had
been invented only for me and which I could, I did not know why, never completely comply with; then a second world,
which was infinitely remote from mine, in which you lived, concerned with government, with the issuing of orders and with
the annoyance about their not being obeyed; and finally a third world where everybody else lived happily and free from
orders and from having to obey. I was continually in disgrace; either I obeyed your orders, and that was a disgrace, for
they applied, after all, only to me; or I was defiant, and that was a disgrace too, for how could I presume to defy you; or I
could not obey because I did not, for instance, have your strength, your appetite, your skill, although you expected it of me
as a matter of course; this was the greatest disgrace of all. This was not the course of the child's reflections, but of his
feelings.
My situation at that time becomes clearer, perhaps, if I compare it with that of Felix. You do, of course, treat him in a
similar way, even indeed employing a particularly terrible method against him in his upbringing: whenever at meals he
does anything that is in your opinion unclean, you are not content to say to him, as you used to say to me: "You are a pig,"
but add: "a real Hermann" or "just like your father." Now this may perhaps—one can't say more than "perhaps"—not really
harm Felix in any essential way, because you are only a grandfather to him, an especially important one, of course, but still
not everything as you were for me; and besides, Felix is of a quiet, even at this stage to a certain extent manly character,
one who may perhaps be disconcerted by a great voice thundering at him, but not permanently conditioned by it. But above
all he is, of course, only comparatively seldom with you, and besides, he is also under other influences; you are for him a
rather endearing curiosity from which he can pick and choose whatever he likes. For me you were nothing in the least like
a curiosity, I couldn't pick and choose, I had to take everything.
And this without being able to produce any arguments against any of it, for it is fundamentally impossible for you to talk
calmly about a subject you don't approve of or even one that was not suggested by you; your imperious temperament does
not permit it. In recent years you have been explaining this as due to your nervous heart condition. I don't know that you
were ever essentially different. Rather, the nervous heart condition is a means by which you exert your domination more
strongly, since the thought of it necessarily chokes off the least opposition from others. This is, of course, not a reproach,
only a statement of fact. As in Ottla's case, when you say: "You simply can't talk to her at all, she flies straight in your
face," but in reality she does not begin by flying out at all. You mistake the person for the thing. The thing under discussion
is what flies in your face and you immediately made up your mind about it without listening to the person; whatever is
brought forward afterward merely serves to irritate you further, never to convince you. Then all one gets from you is: "Do
whatever you like. So far as I'm concerned you have a free hand. You're of age, I've no advice to give you," and all this
with that frightful, hoarse undertone of anger and utter condemnation that makes me tremble less today than in my
childhood only because the child's exclusive sense of guilt has been partly replaced by insight into our helplessness, yours
and mine.
The impossibility of getting on calmly together had one more result, actually a very natural one: I lost the capacity to talk. I
daresay I would not have become a very eloquent person in any case, but I would, after all, have acquired the usual
fluency of human language. But at a very early stage you forbade me to speak. Your threat, "Not a word of contradiction!"
and the raised hand that accompanied it have been with me ever since. What I got from you—and you are, whenever it is
a matter of your own affairs, an excellent talker—was a hesitant, stammering mode of speech, and even that was still too
much for you, and finally I kept silent, at first perhaps out of defiance, and then because I could neither think nor speak in
your presence. And because you were the person who really brought me up, this has had its repercussions throughout my
life. It is altogether a remarkable mistake for you to believe I never complied with your wishes. "Always contrary" was
really not my basic principle where you were concerned, as you believe and as you reproach me. On the contrary: if I had
obeyed you less, I am sure you would have been much better pleased with me. As it is, all your educational measures hit
the mark exactly. There was no hold I tried to escape. As I now am, I am (apart, of course, from the fundamentals and
the influence of life itself) the result of your upbringing and of my obedience. That this result is nevertheless distressing to
you, indeed that you unconsciously refuse to acknowledge it as the result of your methods of upbringing, is due to the fact
that your hand and the material I offered were so alien to each other. You would say: "Not a word of contradiction!"
thinking that that was a way of silencing the oppositional forces in me that were disagreeable to you, but the effect of it
was too strong for me, I was too docile, I became completely dumb, cringed away from you, hid from you, and only dared
to stir when I was so far away from you that your power could no longer reach me—at least not directly. But you were
faced with all that, and it all seemed to you to be "contrary," whereas it was only the inevitable consequence of your
strength and my weakness.
Your extremely effective rhetorical methods in bringing me up, which never failed to work with me, were: abuse, threats,
irony, spiteful laughter, and—oddly enough—self-pity. I cannot recall your ever having abused me directly and in downright
abusive terms. Nor was that necessary; you had so many other methods, and besides, in talk at home and particularly at
the shop the words of abuse went flying around me in such swarms, as they were flung at other people's heads, that as a
little boy I was sometimes almost stunned and had no reason not to apply them to myself too, for the people you were
abusing were certainly no worse than I was and you were certainly not more displeased with them than with me. And here
again was your enigmatic innocence and inviolability; you cursed and swore without the slightest scruple; yet you
condemned cursing and swearing in other people and would not have it.
You reinforced abusiveness with threats and this applied to me too. How terrible for me was, for instance, that "I'll tear
you apart like a fish," although I knew, of course, that nothing worse was to follow (admittedly, as a little child I didn't
know that), but it was almost exactly in accord with my notions of your power, and I saw you as being capable of doing
this too. It was also terrible when you ran around the table, shouting, grabbing at one, obviously not really trying to grab,
yet pretending to, and Mother (finally) had to rescue one, as it seemed. Once again one had, so it seemed to the child,
remained alive through your mercy and bore one's life henceforth as an undeserved gift from you. This is also the place to
mention the threats about the consequences of disobedience. When I began to do something you did not like and you
threatened me with the prospect of failure, my veneration for your opinion was so great that the failure became inevitable,
even though perhaps it happened only at some later time. I lost confidence in my own actions. I was wavering, doubtful.
The older I became, the more material there was for you to bring up against me as evidence of my worthlessness;
gradually you began really to be right in a certain respect. Once again, I am careful not to assert that I became like this
solely through you; you only intensified what was already there, but you intensified it greatly, simply because where I was
concerned you were very powerful and you employed all your power to that end.
You put special trust in bringing up children by means of irony, and this was most in keeping with your superiority over me.
An admonition from you generally took this form: "Can't you do it in such-and-such a way? That's too hard for you, I
suppose. You haven't the time, of course?" and so on. And each such question would be accompanied by malicious
laughter and a malicious face. One was, so to speak, already punished before one even knew that one had done something
bad. Maddening were also those rebukes in which one was treated as a third person, in other words, considered not
worthy even to be spoken to angrily; that is to say, when you would speak ostensibly to Mother but actually to me, who
was sitting right there. For instance: "Of course, that's too much to expect of our worthy son," and the like. (This produced
a corollary in that, for instance, I did not dare to ask you, and later from habit did not even really much think of asking,
anything directly when Mother was there. It was much less dangerous for the child to put questions to Mother, sitting there
beside you, and to ask Mother: "How is Father?"—so guarding oneself against surprises.) There were, of course, also
cases when one was entirely in agreement with even the worst irony, namely, when it referred to someone else, such as
Elli, with whom I was on bad terms for years. There was an orgy of malice and spiteful delight for me when such things
were said of her, as they were at almost every meal: "She has to sit ten feet back from the table, the big fat lump," and
when you, morosely sitting on your chair without the slightest trace of pleasantness or good humor, a bitter enemy, would
exaggeratedly imitate the way she sat, which you found utterly loathsome. How often such things happened, over and over
again, and how little you really achieved as a result of them! I think the reason was that the expenditure of anger and
malice seemed to be in no proper relation to the subject itself, one did not have the feeling that the anger was caused by
this trifle of sitting some way back from the table, but that the whole bulk of it had already been present to begin with,
then, only by chance, happened to settle on this matter as a pretext for breaking out. Since one was convinced that a
pretext would be found anyway, one did not try very hard, and one's feelings became dulled by these continued threats.
One had gradually become pretty sure of not getting a beating, anyway. One became a glum, inattentive, disobedient child,
always intent on escape, mainly within one's own self. So you suffered, and so we suffered. From your own point of view
you were quite right when, clenching your teeth and with that gurgling laughter that gave the child its first notions of hell,
you used to say bitterly (as you did only just recently in connection with a letter from Constantinople): "A nice crowd that
is!"
What seemed to be quite incompatible with this attitude toward your children was, and it happened very often, that you
openly lamented your situation. I confess that as a child (though probably somewhat later) I was completely callous about
this and could not understand how you could possibly expect to get any sympathy from anyone. You were such a giant in
every respect. What could you care for our pity or even our help? Our help, indeed, you could not but despise, as you so
often despised us ourselves. Hence, I did not take these laments at their face value and looked for some hidden motive
behind them. Only later did I come to understand that you really suffered a great deal because of your children; but at that
time, when these laments might under different circumstances still have met with a childish, candid sympathy,
unhesitatingly ready to offer any help it could, to me they had to seem like overemphatic means of disciplining me and
humiliating me, as such not in themselves very intense, but with the harmful side effect that the child became conditioned
not to take very seriously the very things it should have taken seriously.
Fortunately, there were exceptions to all this, mostly when you suffered in silence, and affection and kindliness by their
own strength overcame all obstacles, and moved me immediately. Rare as this was, it was wonderful. For instance, in
earlier years, in hot summers, when you were tired after lunch, I saw you having a nap at the office, your elbow on the
desk; or you joined us in the country, in the summer holidays, on Sundays, worn out from work; or the time Mother was
gravely ill and you stood holding on to the bookcase, shaking with sobs; or when, during my last illness, you came tiptoeing
to Ottla's room to see me, stopping in the doorway, craning your neck to see me, and out of consideration only waved to
me with your hand. At such times one would lie back and weep for happiness, and one weeps again now, writing it down.
You have a particularly beautiful, very rare way of quietly, contentedly, approvingly smiling, a way of smiling that can make
the person for whom it is meant entirely happy. I can't recall its ever having expressly been my lot in my childhood, but I
dare say it may have happened, for why should you have refused it to me at a time when I still seemed blameless to you
and was your great hope? Yet in the long run even such friendly impressions brought about nothing but an increased sense
of guilt, making the world still more incomprehensible to me.
I would rather keep to the practical and permanent. In order to assert myself even a little in relation to you, and partly too
from a kind of vengefulness, I soon began to observe little ridiculous things about you, to collect them and to exaggerate
them. For instance, how easily you let yourself be dazzled by people who were only seemingly above you, how you would
keep on talking about them, as of some Imperial Councilor or some such (on the other hand, such things also pained me,
to see you, my father, believing you had any need of such trifling confirmations of your own value, and boasting about
them), or I would note your taste for indecent expressions, which you would produce in the loudest possible voice,
laughing about them as though you had said something particularly good, while in point of fact it was only a banal little
obscenity (at the same time this again was for me a humiliating manifestation of your vitality). There were, of course,
plenty of such observations. I was happy about them; they gave me occasion for whispering and joking; you sometimes
noticed it and were angry about it, took it for malice and lack of respect, but believe me, it was for me nothing other than a
means—moreover, a useless one—of attempted self-preservation; they were jokes of the kind that are made about gods
and kings, jokes that are not only compatible with the profoundest respect but are indeed part and parcel of it.
Incidentally, you too, in keeping with your similar position where I was concerned, tried a similar form of self-defense. You
were in the habit of pointing out how exaggeratedly well off I was and how well I had in fact been treated. That is correct
but I don't believe it was of any real use to me under the prevailing circumstances. It is true that Mother was endlessly
good to me, but for me all that was in relation to you, that is to say, in no good relation. Mother unconsciously played the
part of a beater during a hunt. Even if your method of upbringing might in some unlikely case have set me on my own feet
by means of producing defiance, dislike, or even hate in me, Mother canceled that out again by kindness, by talking
sensibly (in the confusion of my childhood she was the very prototype of good sense and reasonableness), by pleading for
me; and I was again driven back into your orbit, which I might perhaps otherwise have broken out of, to your advantage
and to my own. Or it happened that no real reconciliation came about, that Mother merely shielded me from you in secret,
secretly gave me something, or allowed me to do something, and then where you were concerned I was again the furtive
creature, the cheat, the guilty one, who in his worthlessness could only pursue sneaky methods even to get the things he
regarded as his right. Of course, I became used to taking such a course also in quest of things to which, even in my own
view, I had no right. This again meant an increase in the sense of guilt. It is also true that you hardly ever really gave me a
beating. But the shouting, the way your face got red, the hasty undoing of the suspenders and laying them ready over the
back of the chair, all that was almost worse for me. It is as if someone is going to be hanged. If he really is hanged, then
he is dead and it is all over. But if he has to go through all the preliminaries to being hanged and he learns of his reprieve
only when the noose is dangling before his face, he may suffer from it all his life. Besides, from the many occasions on
which I had, according to your clearly expressed opinion, deserved a beating but was let off at the last moment by your
grace, I again accumulated only a huge sense of guilt. On every side I was to blame, I was in your debt.
You have always reproached me (either alone or in front of others, since you have no feeling for the humiliation of the
latter, and your children's affairs were always public) for living in peace and quiet, warmth and abundance, lacking nothing,
thanks to your hard work. I think of remarks that must positively have worn grooves in my brain, such as: "When I was
only seven I had to push a handcart from village to village." "We all had to sleep in one room." "We were glad when we
got potatoes." "For years I had open sores on my legs because I did not have enough warm clothes." "I was only a little
boy when I was sent to Pisek to work in a store." "I got nothing from home, not even when I was in the army, but still I
managed to send money home." "But for all that, for all that—Father was always Father to me. Ah, nobody knows what
that means these days! What do these children know? Nobody's been through that! Does any child understand such things
today?" Under other conditions such stories might have been very educational, they might have been a way in encouraging
one and strengthening one to endure torments and deprivations similar to those one's father had undergone. But that
wasn't what you wanted at all; the situation had, after all, become quite different as a result of all your efforts, and there
was no opportunity to distinguish oneself as you had done. Such an opportunity would first of all have had to be created by
violence and revolutions, it would have meant breaking away from home (assuming one had had the resolution and
strength to do so and that Mother wouldn't have worked against it, for her part, with other means) But that was not what
you wanted at all, that you termed ingratitude, extravagance, disobedience, treachery, madness. And so, while on the one
hand you tempted me to it by means of example, story, and humiliation, on the other hand you forbade it with the utmost
severity. Otherwise, for instance you ought to have been delighted with Ottla's Zürau escapade*—apart from the
accompanying circumstances. She wanted to get back to the country from which you had come, she wanted work and
hardship such as you had had, she did not want to depend on the fruits of your labor, just as you yourself were
independent of your father. Were those such dreadful intentions? Was that so remote from your example and your
precept? Well, Ottla's intentions finally came to nothing in practice, were indeed perhaps carried out in a somewhat
ridiculous way, with too much fuss, and she did not have enough consideration for her parents. But was that exclusively
her fault and not also the fault of the circumstances and, above all, of the fact that you were so estranged from her? Was
she any less estranged from you (as you later tried to convince yourself) in the business than afterward at Zürau? And
would you not quite certainly have had the power (assuming you could have brought yourself to do so) to turn that
escapade into something very good by means of encouragement, advice, and supervision, perhaps even merely by means
of toleration?
*Refers to his sister Ottla's taking over the management of a farm in the German-Bohemian town of Zürau. Kafka spent
time with her there during his illness in 1917-18. (Ed.)
In connection with such experiences you used to say, in bitter jest, that we were too well off. But that joke is, in a sense,
no joke at all. What you had to fight for we received from your hand, but the fight for external life, a fight that was instantly
open to you and which we are, of course, not spared either, we now have to fight for only late in life, in our maturity but
with only childish strength. I do not say that our situation is therefore inevitably less favorable than yours was, on the
contrary, it is probably no better and no worse (although this is said without reference to our different natures), only we
have the disadvantage of not being able to boast of our wretchedness and not being able to humiliate anyone with it as you
have done with your wretchedness. Nor do I deny that it might have been possible for me to really enjoy the fruits of your
great and successful work; that I could have turned them to good account and, to your joy, continued to work with them;
but here again, our estrangement stood in the way. I could enjoy what you gave, but only in humiliation, weariness,
weakness, and with a sense of guilt. That was why I could be grateful to you for everything only as a beggar is, and could
never show it by doing the right things.
The next external result of this whole method of upbringing was that I fled everything that even remotely reminded me of
you. First, the business. In itself, especially in my childhood, so long as it was still a simple shop, I ought to have liked it
very much, it was so full of life, lit up in the evening, there was so much to see and hear; one was able to help now and
then, to distinguish oneself, and, above all, to admire you for your magnificent commercial talents, for the way you sold
things, managed people, made jokes, were untiring, in case of doubt knew how to make the right decision immediately,
and so forth; even the way you wrapped a parcel or opened a crate was a spectacle worth watching; all this was certainly
not the worst school for a child. But since you gradually began to terrify me on all sides and the business and you became
one thing for me, the business too made me feel uneasy. Things that had at first been a matter of course for me there
now began to torment and shame me, particularly the way you treated the staff. I don't know, perhaps it was the same in
most businesses (in the Assicurazioni Generali, for instance, in my time it was really similar, and the explanation I gave the
director for my resignation was, though not strictly in accordance with the truth, still not entirely a lie: my not being able to
bear the cursing and swearing, which incidentally had not actually been directed at me; it was something to which I had
become too painfully sensitive from home), but in my childhood other businesses did not concern me. But you I heard and
saw shouting, cursing, and raging in the shop, in a way that in my opinion at that time had no equal anywhere in the world.
And not only cursing, but other sorts of tyrannizing. For instance, the way you pushed goods you did not want to have
mixed up with others off the counter—only the thoughtlessness of your rage was some slight excuse—and how the clerk
had to pick them up. Or your constant comment about a clerk who had TB: "The sooner that sick dog croaks the better."
You called the employees "paid enemies," and that was what they were, but even before they became that, you seemed to
me to be their "paying enemy." There, too, I learned the great lesson that you could be unjust; in my own case I would not
have noticed it so soon, for there was too much accumulated sense of guilt in me ready to admit that you were right; but in
the shop, in my childish view—which later, of course, became somewhat modified, although not too much so—were
strangers, who were after all, working for us and for that reason had to live in constant dread of you. Of course I
exaggerated, because I simply assumed you had as terrible an effect on these people as on me. If it had been so, they
could not have lived at all; since, however they were grown-up people, most of them with excellent nerves, they shook off
this abuse without any trouble and in the end it did you much more harm than it did them. But it made the business
insufferable to me, reminding me far too much of my relations with you; quite apart from your proprietary interest and
apart from your mania for domination even as a businessman, you were so greatly superior to all those who ever came to
learn the business from you that nothing they ever did could satisfy you, and you must, as I assumed, in the same way be
forever dissatisfied with me too. That was why I could not help siding with the staff; I did it also, by the way, because from
sheer nervousness I could not understand how anyone could be so abusive to a stranger, and therefore—from sheer
nervousness and for no other reason than my own security—I tried to reconcile the staff, which must, I thought, be in a
terrible state of indignation, with you and with our family. To this end it was not enough for me to behave in an ordinary
decent way toward the staff, or even modestly; more than that, I had to be humble, not only be first to say "good morning"
or "good evening," but if at all possible I had to forestall any return of the greeting. And even if I, insignificant creature that
I was, down below, had licked their feet it would still have been no compensation for the way that you, the master, were
lashing out at them up above. This relationship that I came to have toward my fellow man extended beyond the limits of
the business and on into the future (something similar, but not so dangerous and deep—going as in my case, is for
instance Ottla's taste for associating with poor people, sitting together with the maids, which annoys you so much, and the
like). In the end I was almost afraid of the business and, in any case, it had long ceased to be any concern of mine even
before I went to the Gymnasium and hence was taken even further away from it. Besides, it seemed to be entirely beyond
my resources and capacities since, as you said, it exhausted even yours. You then tried (today this seems to me both
touching and shaming) to extract, nevertheless, some little sweetness for yourself from my dislike of the business, of your
world—a dislike that was after all very distressing to you—by asserting that I had no business sense, that I had loftier
ideas in my head, and the like. Mother was, of course, delighted with this explanation that you wrung from yourself, and I
too, in my vanity and wretchedness, let myself be influenced by it. But if it had really been only or mainly "loftier ideas" that
turned me against the business (which I now, but only now, have come really and honestly to hate), they would have had
to express themselves differently, instead of letting me float quickly and timidly through my schooling and my law studies
until I finally landed at a clerk's desk.
If I was to escape from you, I had to escape from the family as well, even from Mother. True, one could always get
protection from her, but only in relation to you. She loved you too much and was too devoted and loyal to you to have been
for long an independent spiritual force in the child's struggle. This was, incidentally, a correct instinct of the child, for with
the passing of the years Mother became ever more closely allied to you; while, where she herself was concerned, she
always kept her independence, within the narrowest limits, delicately and beautifully, and without ever essentially hurting
you, still, with the passing of the years she more and more completely, emotionally rather than intellectually, blindly
adopted your judgments and your condemnations with regard to the children, particularly in the case—certainly a grave
one—of Ottla. Of course, it must always be borne in mind how tormenting and utterly wearing Mother's position in the
family was. She toiled in the business and in the house, and doubly suffered all the family illnesses, but the culmination of
all this was what she suffered in her position between us and you. You were always affectionate and considerate toward
her, but in this respect, you spared her just as little as we spared her. We all hammered ruthlessly away at her, you from
your side, we from ours. It was a diversion, nobody meant any harm, thinking of the battle that you were waging with us
and that we were waging with you, and it was Mother who got the brunt of all our wild feelings. Nor was it at all a good
contribution to the children's upbringing the way you—of course, without being in the slightest to blame for it yourself—
tormented her on our account. It even seemed to justify our otherwise unjustifiable behavior toward her. How she suffered
from us on your accounts and from you on our account, even without counting those cases in which you were in the right
because she was spoiling us, even though this "spoiling" may sometimes have been only a quiet, unconscious
counterdemonstration against your system. Of course, Mother could not have borne all this if she had not drawn the
strength to bear it from her love for us all and her happiness in that love.
My sisters were only partly on my side. The one who was happiest in her relation to you was Valli. Being closest to Mother,
she fell in with your wishes in a similar way, without much effort and without suffering much harm. And because she
reminded you of Mother, you did accept her in a more friendly spirit, although there was little Kafka material in her. But
perhaps that was precisely what you wanted; where there was nothing of the Kafka's, even you could not demand anything
of the sort, nor did you feel, as with the rest of us, that something was getting lost which had to be saved by force.
Besides, it may be that you were never particularly fond of the Kafka element as it manifested itself in women. Valli's
relationship to you would perhaps have become even friendlier if the rest of us had not disturbed it somewhat.
Elli is the only example of the almost complete success of a breaking away from your orbit. When she was a child she was
the last person I should have expected it of. For she was such a clumsy, tired, timid, bad-tempered, guilt-ridden,
overmeek, malicious, lazy, greedy, miserly child, I could hardly bring myself to look at her, certainly not to speak to her, so
much did she remind me of myself, in so very much the same way was she under the same spell of our upbringing. Her
miserliness was especially abhorrent to me, since I had it to an, if possible, even greater extent. Miserliness is, after all,
one of the most reliable signs of profound unhappiness; I was so unsure of everything that, in fact, I possessed only what I
actually had in my hands or in my mouth or what was at least on the way there, and this was precisely what she, being in
a similar situation, most enjoyed taking away from me. But all this changed when, at an early age—this is the most
important thing—she left home, married, had children, and became cheerful, carefree, brave, generous, unselfish, and
hopeful. It is almost incredible how you did not really notice this change at all, or at any rate did not give it its due, blinded
as you were by the grudge you have always borne Elli and fundamentally still bear her to this day; only this grudge matters
much less now, since Elli no longer lives with us and, besides, your love for Felix and your affection for Karl have made it
less important. Only Gerti sometimes has to suffer for it still.
I scarcely dare write of Ottla; I know that by doing so I jeopardize the whole effect I hope for from this letter. In ordinary
circumstances, that is, so long as she is not in particular need or danger, all you feel is only hatred for her; you yourself
have confessed to me that in your opinion she is always intentionally causing you suffering and annoyance and that while
you are suffering on her account she is satisfied and pleased. In other words, a sort of fiend. What an immense
estrangement, greater still than that between you and me, must have come about between you and her, for such an
immense misunderstanding to be possible. She is so remote from you that you scarcely see her any more, instead, you put
a specter in the place where you suppose her to be. I grant you that you have had a particularly difficult time with her. I
don't, of course, quite see to the bottom of this very complicated case, but at any rate here was something like a kind of
Löwy, equipped with the best Kafka weapons. Between us there was no real struggle; I was soon finished off; what
remained was flight, embitterment, melancholy, and inner struggle. But you Twowere always in a fighting position, always
fresh, always energetic. A sight as magnificent as it was desperate. At the very beginning you were, I am sure, very close
to each other, because of the four of us Ottla is even today perhaps the purest representation of the marriage between you
and Mother and of the forces it combined. I don't know what it was that deprived you both of the happiness of the harmony
between father and child, but I can't help believing that the development in this case was similar to that in mine. On your
side there was the tyranny of your own nature, on her side the Löwy defiance, touchiness, sense of justice, restlessness,
and all that backed by the consciousness of the Kafka vigor. Doubtless I too influenced her, but scarcely of my own doing,
simply through the fact of my existence. Besides, as the last to arrive, she found herself in a situation in which the balance
of power was already established, and was able to form her own judgment from the large amount of material at her
disposal. I can even imagine that she may, in her inmost being, have wavered for some time as to whether she should
fling herself into your arms or into those of the adversaries; and it is obvious that at that time there was something you
failed to do and that you rebuffed her, but if it had been possible, the Twoof you would have become a magnificently
harmonious pair. That way I should have lost an ally, but the sight of you Twowould have richly compensated me; besides,
the incredible happiness of finding complete contentment at least in one child would have changed you much to my
advantage. All this, however, is today only a dream. Ottla has no contact with her father and has to seek her way alone,
like me, and the degree of confidence, self-confidence, health, and ruthlessness by which she surpasses me makes her in
your eyes more wicked and treacherous than I seem to you. I understand that. From your point of view she can't be
different. Indeed, she herself is capable of regarding herself with your eyes, of feeling what you suffer and of being—not
desperate (despair is my business) but very sad. You do see us together often enough, in apparent contradiction to this,
whispering and laughing, and now and then you hear us mentioning you. The impression you get is that of impudent
conspirators. Strange conspirators. You are, admittedly, a chief subject of our conversations, as of our thoughts ever since
we can remember, but truly, not in order to plot against you do we sit together, but in order to discuss—with all our might
and main, jokingly and seriously, in affection, defiance, anger, revulsion, submission, consciousness of guilt, with all the
resources of our heads and hearts—this terrible trial that is pending between us and you, to examine it in all its details,
from all sides, on all occasions, from far and near—a trial in which you keep on claiming to be the judge, whereas, at least
in the main (here I leave a margin for all the mistakes I may naturally make) you are a party too, just as weak and
deluded as we are. An example of the effect of your methods of upbringing, one that is very instructive in the context of the
whole situation, is the case of Irma. On the one hand, she was, after all, a stranger, already grown up when she entered
your business, and had to deal with you mainly as her employer, so that she was only partially exposed to your influence,
and this at an age when she had already developed powers of resistance; yet, on the other hand, she was also a blood
relation, venerating you as her father's brother, and the power you had over her was far greater than that of a mere
employer. And despite all this she, who, with her frail body, was so efficient, intelligent, hard-working, modest,
trustworthy, unselfish, and loyal, who loved you as her uncle and admired you as her employer, she who proved herself in
previous and in subsequent positions, was not a very good clerk to you. Her relationship with you was, in fact, nearly that
of one of your children—pushed into that role, naturally, by us, too—and the power of your personality to bend others was,
even in her case, so great that (admittedly only in relation to you and, it is to be hoped, without the deeper suffering of a
child) she developed forgetfulness, carelessness, a sort of gallows humor, and perhaps even a shade of defiance, in so far
as she was capable of that at all. And I do not even take into account that she was ailing, and not very happy in other
respects either, and that she was burdened by a bleak home life. What was so illuminating to me in your relation to her,
you yourself summed up in a remark that became classical for us, one that was almost blasphemous, but at the same time
extraordinary evidence of the naïveté of your way of treating people: "The late lamented has left me quite a mess."
I might go on to describe further orbits of your influence and of the struggle against it, but there I would be entering
uncertain ground and would have to construct things and, apart from that, the farther you are away from your business
and your family, the pleasanter you have always become, easier to get on with, better mannered, more considerate, and
more sympathetic (I mean outwardly, too), in exactly the same way as for instance an autocrat, when he happens to be
outside the frontiers of his own country, has no reason to go on being tyrannical and is able to associate good-humoredly
even with the lowest of the low. In fact, in the group photographs taken at Franzensbad, for instance, you always looked
as big and jolly, among those sulky little people, as a king on his travels. This was something, I grant you, from which your
children might have benefited too, if they had been capable of recognizing this even as little children, which was
impossible; and if I, for one, had not had to live constantly within the inmost, strictest, binding ring of your influence, as, in
fact, I did.
Not only did I lose my family feeling, as you say; on the contrary, I did indeed have a feeling about the family, mostly in a
negative sense, concerned with the breaking away from you (which, of course could never be done completely). Relations
with people outside the family, however, suffered possibly still more under your influence. You are entirely mistaken if you
believe I do everything for other people out of affection and loyalty, and for you and the family nothing, out of coldness and
betrayal. I repeat for the tenth time: Even in other circumstances I should probably have become a shy and nervous
person, but it is a long dark road from there to where I have really come. (Up to now I have intentionally passed over in
silence relatively little in this letter, but now and later I shall have to keep silent about some things that are still too hard for
me to confess—to you and to myself. I say this in order that if the picture as a whole should be somewhat blurred here
and there, you should not believe that this is due to lack of evidence; on the contrary, there is evidence that might well
make the picture unbearably stark. It is not easy to find a middle way.) Here, it is enough to remind you of early days. I
had lost my self-confidence where you were concerned, and in its place had developed a boundless sense of guilt. (In
recollection of this boundlessness I once wrote of someone, accurately: "He is afraid the shame will outlive him.") I could
not suddenly change when I was with other people; rather, I came to feel an even deeper sense of guilt with them, for, as
I have already said, I had to make up to them for the wrongs you had done them in your business, wrongs in which I too
had my share of responsibility. Besides, you always had some objection to make, frankly or covertly, about everyone I
associated with, and for this too I had to atone. The mistrust that you tried to instill into me toward most people, at
business and at home (name a single person who was of importance to me in my childhood whom you didn't at least once
tear to shreds with your criticism), was, oddly enough, of no particular burden to you (you were strong enough to bear it;
besides, it was perhaps really only a token of the autocrat). This mistrust (which was nowhere confirmed in the eyes of the
little boy, since everywhere I saw only people excellent beyond any hope of emulation) turned in me to mistrust of myself
and perpetual anxiety about everything else. There, then, I was in general certain of not being able to escape from you.
That you were mistaken on this point was perhaps due to your actually never learning anything about my association with
other people; and mistrustfully and jealously (I don't deny, do I, that you are fond of me?) you assumed that I had to
compensate elsewhere for the lack of a family life, since it must be impossible that away from home I should live in the
same way. Incidentally, in this respect, it was precisely in my childhood that I did find a certain comfort in my very mistrust
of my own judgment. I would say to myself: "Oh, you're exaggerating, you tend too much to feel trivialities as great
exceptions, the way young people always do." But this comfort I later lost almost entirely, when I gained a clearer
perspective of the world.
I found just as little escape from you in Judaism. Here some measure of escape would have been thinkable in principle,
moreover, it would have been thinkable that we might both have found each other in Judaism or that we even might have
begun from there in harmony. But what sort of Judaism was it that I got from you? In the course of the years, I have taken
roughly three different attitudes to it. As a child I reproached myself, in accord with you, for not going to the synagogue
often enough, for not fasting, and so on. I thought that in this way I was doing a wrong not to myself but to you, and I was
penetrated by a sense of guilt, which was, of course, always near at hand.
Later, as a young man, I could not understand how, with the insignificant scrap of Judaism you yourself possessed, you
could reproach me for not making an effort (for the sake of piety at least, as you put it) to cling to a similar, insignificant
scrap. It was indeed, so far as I could see, a mere nothing, a joke—not even a joke. Four days a year you went to the
synagogue, where you were, to say the least, closer to the indifferent than to those who took it seriously, patiently went
through the prayers as a formality, sometimes amazed me by being able to show me in the prayer book the passage that
was being said at the moment, and for the rest, so long as I was present in the synagogue (and this was the main thing) I
was allowed to hang around wherever I liked. And so I yawned and dozed through the many hours (I don't think I was
ever again so bored, except later at dancing lessons) and did my best to enjoy the few little bits of variety there were, as
for instance when the Ark of the Covenant was opened, which always reminded me of the shooting galleries where a
cupboard door would open in the same way whenever one hit a bull's-eye; except that there something interesting always
came out and here it was always just the same old dolls without heads. Incidentally, it was also very frightening for me
there, not only, as goes without saying, because of all the people one came into close contact with, but also because you
once mentioned in passing that I too might be called to the Torah. That was something I dreaded for years. But otherwise
I was not fundamentally disturbed in my boredom, unless it was by the bar mitzvah, but that demanded no more than
some ridiculous memorizing, in other words, it led to nothing but some ridiculous passing of an examination; and, so far as
you were concerned, by little, not very significant incidents, as when you were called to the Torah and passed, in what to
my way of feeling was a purely social event, or when you stayed on in the synagogue for the prayers for the dead, and I
was sent away, which for a long time—obviously because of the being sent away and the lack of any deeper interest—
aroused in me the more or less unconscious feeling that something indecent was about to take place.—That's how it was
in the synagogue; at home it was, if possible, even poorer, being confined to the first Seder, which more and more
developed into a farce, with fits of hysterical laughter, admittedly under the influence of the growing children. (Why did you
have to give way to that influence? Because you had brought it about.) This was the religious material that was handed on
to me, to which may be added at most the outstretched hand pointing to "the sons of the millionaire Fuchs," who attended
the synagogue with their father on the High Holy Days. How one could do anything better with that material than get rid of
it as fast as possible, I could not understand; precisely the getting rid of it seemed to me to be the devotes action.
Still later, I did see it again differently and realized why it was possible for you to think that in this respect too I was
malevolently betraying you. You really had brought some traces of Judaism with you from the ghetto-like village
community; it was not much and it dwindled a little more in the city and during your military service; but still, the
impressions and memories of your youth did just about suffice for some sort of Jewish life, especially since you did not
need much help of that kind, but came of robust stock and could personally scarcely be shaken by religious scruples unless
they were strongly mixed with social scruples. Basically the faith that ruled your life consisted in your believing in the
unconditional rightness of the opinions of a certain class of Jewish society, and hence actually, since these opinions were
part and parcel of your own nature, in believing in yourself. Even in this there was still Judaism enough, but it was too little
to be handed on to the child; it all dribbled away while you were passing it on. In part, it was youthful memories that could
not be passed on to others; in part, it was your dreaded personality. It was also impossible to make a child, overacutely
observant from sheer nervousness, understand that the few flimsy gestures you performed in the name of Judaism, and
with an indifference in keeping with their flimsiness, could have any higher meaning. For you they had meaning as little
souvenirs of earlier times, and that was why you wanted to pass them on to me, but since they no longer had any intrinsic
value even for you could do this only through persuasion or threat; on the one hand, this could not be successful, and on
the other, it had to make you very angry with me on account of my apparent obstinacy, since you did not recognize the
weakness of your position in this.
The whole thing is, of course, no isolated phenomenon. It was much the same with a large section of this transitional
generation of Jews, which had migrated from the still comparatively devout countryside to the cities. It happened
automatically; only, it added to our relationship, which certainly did not lack in acrimony, one more sufficiently painful
source for it. Although you ought to believe, as I do, in your guiltlessness in this matter too, you ought to explain this
guiltlessness by your nature and by the conditions of the times, not merely by external circumstances; that is, not by
saying, for instance, that you had too much work and too many other worries to be able to bother with such things as well.
In this manner you tend to twist your undoubted guiltlessness into an unjust reproach to others. That can be very easily
refuted everywhere and here too. It was not a matter of any sort of instruction you ought to have given your children, but
of an exemplary life. Had your Judaism been stronger, your example would have been more compelling too; this goes
without saying and is, again, by no means a reproach, but only a refutation of your reproaches. You have recently been
reading Franklin's memoirs of his youth. I really did purposely give you this book to read, though not, as you ironically
commented, because of a little passage on vegetarianism, but because of the relationship between the author and his
father, as it is there described, and of the relationship between the author and his son, as it is spontaneously revealed in
these memoirs written for that son. I do not wish to dwell here on matters of detail.
I have received a certain retrospective confirmation of this view of your Judaism from your attitude in recent years, when it
seemed to you that I was taking more interest in Jewish matters. As you have in advance an aversion to every one of my
activities and especially to the nature of my interest, so you have had it here too. But in spite of this, one could have
expected that in this case you would make a little exception. It was, after all, Judaism of your Judaism that was coming to
life here, and with it also the possibility of entering into a new relationship between us. I do not deny that, had you shown
interest in them, these things might, for that very reason, have become suspect in my eyes. I do not even dream of
asserting that I am in this respect any better than you are. But it never came to the test. Through my intervention Judaism
became abhorrent to you, Jewish writings unreadable; they "nauseated" you.—This may have meant you insisted that only
that Judaism which you had shown me in my childhood was the right one, and beyond it there was nothing. Yet that you
should insist on it was really hardly thinkable. But then the "nausea" (apart from the fact that it was directed primarily not
against Judaism but against me personally) could only mean that unconsciously you did acknowledge the weakness of your
Judaism and of my Jewish upbringing, did not wish to be reminded of it in any way, and reacted to any reminder with frank
hatred. Incidentally, your negative high esteem of my new Judaism was much exaggerated; first of all, it bore your curse
within it, and secondly in its development the fundamental relationship to one's fellow men was decisive, in my case that is
to say fatal.
You struck closer to home with your aversion to my writing and to everything that, unknown to you, was connected with it.
Here I had, in fact, got some distance away from you by my own efforts, even if it was slightly reminiscent of the worm
that, when a foot treads on its tail end, breaks loose with its front part and drags itself aside. To a certain extent I was in
safety; there was a chance to breathe freely. The aversion you naturally and immediately took to my writing was, for once,
welcome to me. My vanity, my ambition did suffer under your soon proverbial way of hailing the arrival of my books: "Put it
on my bedside table!" (usually you were playing cards when a book came), but I was really quite glad of it, not only out of
rebellious malice, not only out of delight at a new confirmation of my view of our relationship, but quite spontaneously,
because to me that formula sounded something like: "Now you are free!" Of course it was a delusion; I was not, or, to put
it most optimistically, was not yet, free. My writing was all about you; all I did there, after all, was to bemoan what I could
not bemoan upon your breast. It was an intentionally long and drawn-out leave-taking from you, yet, although it was
enforced by you, it did take its course in the direction determined by me. But how little all this amounted to! It is only worth
talking about because it happened in my life, otherwise it would not even be noted; and also because in my childhood it
ruled my life as a premonition, later as a hope, and still later often as despair, and it dictated—yet again in your shape, it
may be said—my few small decisions.
For instance, the choice of a career. True, here you gave me complete freedom, in your magnanimous and, in this regard,
even indulgent manner. Although here again you were conforming to the general method of treating sons in the Jewish
middle class, which was the standard for you, or at least to the values of that class. Finally, one of your misunderstandings
concerning my person played a part in this too. In fact, out of paternal pride, ignorance of my real life, and conclusions
drawn from my feebleness, you have always regarded me as particularly diligent. As a child I was, in your view, always
studying, and later always writing. This does not even remotely correspond to the facts. It would be more correct, and
much less exaggerated, to say that I studied little and learned nothing; that something did stick in my mind after those
many years is, after all, not very remarkable, since I did have a moderately good memory and a not too inferior capacity
for learning; but the sum total of knowledge and especially of a solid grounding of knowledge is extremely pitiable in
comparison with the expenditure of time and money in the course of an outwardly untroubled, calm life, particularly also in
comparison with almost all the people I know. It is pitiable, but to me understandable. Ever since I could think, I have had
such profound anxieties about asserting my spiritual and intellectual existence that I was indifferent to everything else.
Jewish schoolboys in our country often tend to be odd; among them one finds the most unlikely things; but something like
my cold indifference, scarcely disguised, indestructible, childishly helpless, approaching the ridiculous, and brutishly
complacent, the indifference of a self-sufficient but coldly imaginative child, I have never found anywhere else; to be sure,
it was the sole defense against destruction of the nerves by fear and by a sense of guilt. All that occupied my mind was
worry about myself, and this in various ways. There was, for instance, the worry about my health; it began imperceptibly
enough, with now and then a little anxiety about digestion, hair falling out, a spinal curvature, and so on; intensifying in
innumerable gradations, it finally ended with a real illness. But since there was nothing at all I was certain of, since I
needed to be provided at every instant with a new confirmation of my existence, since nothing was in my very own,
undoubted, sole possession, determined unequivocally only by me—in sober truth a disinherited son—naturally I became
unsure even to the thing nearest to me, my own body. I shot up, tall and lanky, without knowing what to do with my
lankiness, the burden was too heavy, the back became bent; I scarcely dared to move, certainly not to exercise, I
remained weakly; I was amazed by everything I could still command as by a miracle, for instance, my good digestion; that
sufficed to lose it, and now the way was open to every sort of hypochondria; until finally under the strain of the
superhuman effort of wanting to marry (of this I shall speak later), blood came from the lung, something in which the
apartment in the Schönbornpalais—which, however, I needed only because I believed I needed it for my writing, so that
even this belongs here under the same heading—may have had a fair share. So all this did not come from excessive work,
as you always imagine. There were years in which, in perfectly good health, I lazed away more time on the sofa than you
in all your life, including all your illnesses. When I rushed away from you, frightfully busy, it was generally in order to lie
down in my room. My total achievement in work done, both at the office (where laziness is, of course, not particularly
striking, and besides, mine was kept in bounds by my anxiety) and at home, is minute; if you had any real idea of it, you
would be aghast. Probably I am constitutionally not lazy at all, but there was nothing for me to do. In the place where I
lived I was spurned, condemned, fought to a standstill; and to escape to some other place was an enormous exertion, but
that was not work, for it was something impossible, something that was, with small exceptions, unattainable for me.
This was the state in which I was given the freedom of choice of a career. But was I still capable of making any use of
such freedom? Had I still any confidence in my own capacity to achieve a real career? My valuation of myself was much
more dependent on you than on anything else, such as some external success. That was strengthening for a moment,
nothing more, but on the other side your weight always dragged me down much more strongly. Never shall I pass the first
grade in grammar school, I thought, but I succeeded, I even got a prize; but I shall certainly not pass the entrance exam
for the Gymnasium, but I succeeded; but now I shall certainly fail in the first year at the Gymnasium; no, I did not fail, and
I went on and on succeeding. This did not produce any confidence, however; on the contrary, I was always convinced—
and I had positive proof of it in your forbidding expression—that the more I achieved, the worse the final outcome would
inevitably be. Often in my mind's eye I saw the terrible assembly of the teachers (the Gymnasium is only the most obvious
example, but it was the same all around me), as they would meet, when I had passed the first class, and then in the
second class, when I had passed that, and then in the third, and so on, meeting in order to examine this unique,
outrageous case, to discover how I, the most incapable, or at least the most ignorant of all, had succeeded in creeping up
so far as this class, which now, when everybody's attention had at last been focused on me, would of course instantly
spew me out, to the jubilation of all the righteous liberated from this nightmare. To live with such fantasies is not easy for
a child. In these circumstances, what could I care about my lessons? Who was able to strike a spark of real interest in me?
Lessons, and not only lessons but everything around me, interested me as much, at that decisive age, as an embezzling
bank clerk, still holding his job and trembling at the thought of discovery, is interested in the petty ongoing business of the
bank, which he still has to deal with as a clerk. That was how small and faraway everything was in comparison to the main
thing. So it went on up to the qualifying exams which I really passed partly only through cheating, and then everything
came to a standstill, for now I was free. If I had been concerned only with myself up to now, despite the discipline of the
Gymnasium, how much more so now that I was free. So there was actually no such thing for me as freedom to choose my
career, for I knew: compared to the main thing everything would be exactly as much a matter of indifference to me as all
the subjects taught at school, and so it was a matter of finding a profession that would let me indulge this indifference
without injuring my vanity too much. Law was the obvious choice. Little contrary attempts on the part of vanity, of
senseless hope, such as a fortnight's study of chemistry, or six months' German studies, only reinforced that fundamental
conviction. So I studied law. This meant that in the few months before the exams, and in a way that told severely on my
nerves, I was positively living in an intellectual sense, on sawdust, which had moreover already been chewed for me in
thousands of other people's mouths. But in a certain sense this was exactly to my taste, as in a certain sense the
Gymnasium had been earlier, and later my job as a clerk, for it all suited my situation. At any rate, I did show astonishing
foresight; even as a small child I had had fairly clear premonitions about my studies and my career. From this side I did
not expect rescue; here I had given up long ago.
But I showed no foresight at all concerning the significance and possibility of a marriage for me; this up to now greatest
terror of my life has come upon me almost completely unexpectedly. The child had developed so slowly, these things were
outwardly all too remote; now and then the necessity of thinking of them did arise; but the fact that here a permanent,
decisive and indeed the most grimly bitter ordeal loomed was impossible to recognize. In reality, however, the marriage
plans turned out to be the most grandiose and hopeful attempts at escape, and, consequently their failure was
correspondingly grandiose.
I am afraid that because in this sphere everything I try is a failure, I shall also fail to make these attempts to marry
comprehensible to you. And yet the success of this whole letter depends on it, for in these attempts there was, on the one
hand, concentrated everything I had at my disposal in the way of positive forces, and, on the other hand, there also
accumulated, and with downright fury, all the negative forces that I have described as being the result in part of your
method of upbringing, that is to say, the weakness, the lack of self-confidence, the sense of guilt, and they positively drew
a cordon between myself and marriage. The explanation will be hard for me also because I have spent so many days and
nights thinking and burrowing through the whole thing over and over again that now even I myself am bewildered by the
mere sight of it. The only thing that makes the explanation easier for me is your—in my opinion—complete
misunderstanding of the matter; to correct slightly so complete a misunderstanding does not seem excessively difficult.
First of all you rank the failure of the marriages with the rest of my failures; I should have nothing against this provided
you accepted my previous explanation of my failure as a whole. It does, in fact, form part of the same series, only you
underrate the importance of the matter, underrating it to such an extent that whenever we talk of it we are actually talking
about quite different things. I venture to say that nothing has happened to you in your whole life that had such importance
for you as the attempts at marriage have had for me. By this I do not mean that you have not experienced anything in itself
as important; on the contrary, your life was much richer and more care-laden and more concentrated than mine, but for
that very reason nothing of this sort has happened to you. It is as if one person had to climb five low steps and another
person only one step, but one that is, at least for him, as high as all the other five put together; the first person will not
only manage the five, but hundreds and thousands more as well, he will have led a great and very strenuous life, but none
of the steps he has climbed will have been of such importance to him as for the second person that one, firstly high step,
that step which it is impossible for him to climb even by exerting all his strength, that step which he cannot get up on and
which he naturally cannot get past either.
Marrying, founding a family, accepting all the children that come, supporting them in this insecure world and perhaps even
guiding them a little, is, I am convinced, the utmost a human being can succeed in doing at all. That so many seem to
succeed in this is no evidence to the contrary; first of all, there are not many who do succeed, and second, these not-many
usually don't "do" it, it merely "happens" to them; although this is not that utmost, it is still very great and very honorable
(particularly since "doing" and "happening" cannot be kept clearly distinct). And finally, it is not a matter of this utmost at
all, anyway, but only of some distant but decent approximation; it is, after all, not necessary to fly right into the middle of
the sun, but it is necessary to crawl to a clean little spot on Earth where the sun sometimes shines and one can warm
oneself a little.
How was I prepared for this? As badly as possible. This is apparent from what has been said up to now. In so far as any
direct preparation of the individual and any direct creation of the general basic conditions exist, you did not intervene much
outwardly. And it could not be otherwise; what is decisive here are the general sexual customs of class, nation, and time.
Yet you did intervene here too—not much, for such intervention must presuppose great mutual trust, and both of us had
been lacking in this even long before the decisive time came—and not very happily, because our needs were quite
different; what grips me need hardly touch you at all, and vice versa; what is innocence in you may be guilt in me, and vice
versa; what has no consequences for you may be the last nail in my coffin.
I remember going for a walk one evening with you and Mother; it was on Josephsplatz near where the Lander bank is
today; and I began talking about these interesting things, in a stupidly boastful, superior, proud, detached (that was
spurious), cold (that was genuine), and stammering manner, as indeed I usually talked to you, reproaching the Twoof you
with having left me uninstructed; with the fact that my schoolmates first had to take me in hand, that I had been close to
great dangers (here I was brazenly lying, as was my way, in order to show myself brave, for as a consequence of my
timidity I had, except for the usual sexual misdemeanors of city children, no very exact notion of these "great dangers");
but finally I hinted that now, fortunately, I knew everything, no longer needed any advice, and that everything was all right.
I had begun talking about all this mainly because it gave me pleasure at least to talk about it, and also out of curiosity, and
finally to avenge myself somehow on the Twoof you for something or other. In keeping with your nature you took it quite
simply, only saying something to the effect that you could give me advice about how I could go in for these things without
danger. Perhaps I did want to lure just such an answer out of you; it was in keeping with the prurience of a child overfed
with meat and all good things, physically inactive, everlastingly occupied with himself; but still, my outward sense of shame
was so hurt by this—or I believed it ought to be so hurt—that against my will I could not go on talking to you about it and,
with arrogant impudence, cut the conversation short.
It is not easy to judge the answer you gave me then; on the one hand, it had something staggeringly frank, sort of
primeval, about it; on the other hand, as far as the lesson itself is concerned, it was uninhibited in a very modern way. I
don't know how old I was at the time, certainly not much over sixteen. It was, nevertheless, a very remarkable answer for
such a boy, and the distance between the Twoof us is also shown in the fact that it was actually the first direct instruction
bearing on real life I ever received from you. Its real meaning, however, which sank into my mind even then, but which
came partly to the surface of my consciousness only much later, was this: what you advised me to do was in your opinion
and even more in my opinion at that time, the filthiest thing possible. That you wanted to see to it that I should not bring
any of the physical filth home with me was unimportant, for you were only protecting yourself, your house. The important
thing was rather that you yourself remained outside your own advice, a married man, a pure man, above such things; this
was probably intensified for me at the time by the fact that even marriage seemed to me shameless; and hence it was
impossible for me to apply to my parents the general information I had picked up about marriage. Thus you became still
purer, rose still higher. The thought that you might have given yourself similar advice before your marriage was to me
utterly unthinkable. So there was hardly any smudge of earthly filth on you at all. And it was you who pushed me down into
this filth—just as though I were predestined to it with a few frank words. And so, if the world consisted only of me and you
(a notion I was much inclined to have), then this purity of the world came to an end with you and, by virtue of your advice,
thc filth began with me. In itself it was, of course, incomprehensible that you should thus condemn me; only old guilt, and
profoundest contempt on your side, could explain it to me. And so again I was seized in my innermost being—and very
hard indeed.
Here perhaps both our guiltlessness becomes most evident. A gives B a piece of advice that is frank, in keeping with his
attitude to life, not very lovely but still, even today perfectly usual in the city, a piece of advice that might prevent damage
to health. This piece of advice is for B morally not very invigorating—but why should he not be able to work his way out of
it, and repair the damage in the course of the years? Besides, he does not even have to take the advice; and there is no
reason why the advice itself should cause B's whole future world to come tumbling down. And yet something of this kind
does happen, but only for the very reason that A is you and B is myself. This guiltlessness on both sides I can judge
especially well because a similar clash between us occurred some twenty years later, in quite different circumstances—
horrible in itself but much less damaging—for what was there in me, the thirty-six-year-old, that could still be damaged? I
am referring to a brief discussion on one of those few tumultuous days that followed the announcement of my latest
marriage plans. You said to me something like this: "She probably put on a fancy blouse, something these Prague
Jewesses are good at, and right away, of course, you decided to marry her. And that as fast as possible, in a week,
tomorrow, today. I can’t understand you: after all, you're a grown man, you live in the city, and you don't know what to do
but marry the first girl who comes along. Isn't there anything else you can do? If you're frightened, I'll go with you." You
put it in more detail and more plainly, but I can no longer recall the details, perhaps too things became a little vague
before my eyes, I paid almost more attention to Mother who, though in complete agreement with you, took something
from the table and left the room with it.
You have hardly ever humiliated me more deeply with words and shown me your contempt more clearly. When you spoke
to me in a similar way twenty years earlier, one might, looking at it through your eyes, have seen in it some respect for the
precocious city boy, who in your opinion could already be initiated into life without more ado. Today this consideration
could only intensify the contempt, for the boy who was about to make his first start got stuck halfway and today does not
seem richer by any experience, only more pitiable by twenty years. My choice of a girl meant nothing at all to you. You had
(unconsciously) always suppressed my power of decision and now believed (unconsciously) that you knew what it was
worth. Of my attempts at escape in other directions you knew nothing, thus you could not know anything either of the
thought processes that had led me to this attempt to marry, and had to try to guess at them, and in keeping with your
general opinion of me, you interpreted them in the most abominable, crude, and ridiculous light. And you did not for a
moment hesitate to tell me this in just such a manner. The shame you inflicted on me with this was nothing to you in
comparison to the shame that I would, in your opinion, inflict on your name by this marriage.
Now, regarding my attempts at marriage there is much you can say in reply, and you have indeed done so: you could not
have much respect for my decision since I had twice broken the engagement with F. and had twice renewed it, since I had
needlessly dragged you and Mother to Berlin to celebrate the engagement, and the like. All this is true—but how did it
come about?
The fundamental thought behind both attempts at marriage was quite sound: to set up house, to become independent.
An idea that does appeal to you, only in reality it always turns out like the children's game in which one holds and even
grips the other's hand, calling out: "Oh, go away, go away, why don't you go away?" Which in our case happens to be
complicated by the fact that you have always honestly meant this "go away!" and have always unknowingly held me, or
rather held me down, only by the strength of your personality.
Although both girls were chosen by chance, they were extraordinarily well chosen. Again a sign of your complete
misunderstanding, that you can believe that I—timid, hesitant, suspicious—can decide to marry in a flash, out of delight
over a blouse. Both marriages would rather have been commonsense marriages, in so far as that means that day and
night—the first time for years, the second time for months—all my power of thought was concentrated on the plan. Neither
of the girls disappointed me, only I disappointed both of them. My opinion of them is today exactly the same as when I
wanted to marry them.
It is not true either that in my second marriage attempt I disregarded the experience gained from the first attempt, that I
was rash and careless. The cases were quite different; precisely the earlier experience held out a hope for the second
case, which was altogether much more promising. I do not want to go into details here.
Why then did I not marry? There were certainly obstacles, as there always are, but then, life consists in confronting such
obstacles. The essential obstacle, however, which is, unfortunately, independent of the individual case, is that obviously I
am mentally incapable of marrying. This manifests itself in the fact that from the moment I make up my mind to marry I
can no longer sleep, my head burns day and night, life can no longer be called life, I stagger about in despair. It is not
actually worries that bring this about; true, in keeping with my sluggishness and pedantry countless worries are involved in
all this, but they are not decisive; they do, like worms, complete the work on the corpse, but the decisive blow has come
from elsewhere. It is the general pressure of anxiety, of weakness, of self-contempt.
I will try to explain it in more detail. Here, in the attempt to marry, Twoseemingly antagonistic elements in my relations
with you unite more intensely than anywhere else. Marriage certainly is the pledge of the most acute form of self-liberation
and independence. I would have a family, in my opinion the highest one can achieve, and so too the highest you have
achieved; I would be your equal; all old and even new shame and tyranny would be mere history. It would be like a fairy
tale, but precisely there lies the questionable element. It is too much; so much cannot be achieved. It is as if a person
were a prisoner, and he had not only the intention to escape, which would perhaps be attainable, but also, and indeed
simultaneously, the intention to rebuild the prison as a pleasure dome for himself. But if he escapes, he cannot rebuild, and
if he rebuilds, he cannot escape. If I, in the particular unhappy relationship in which I stand to you, want to become
independent, I must do something that will have, if possible, no connection with you at all; though marrying is the greatest
thing of all and provides the most honorable independence, it also stands at the same time in the closest relation to you.
To try to get out of this quandary has therefore a touch of madness about it, and every attempt is punished by being driven
almost mad.
It is precisely this close relation that partly lures me toward marrying. I picture the equality which would then arise
between us—and which you would be able to understand better than any other form of equality—as so beautiful because
then I could be a free, grateful, guiltless, upright son, and you could be an untroubled untyrannical, sympathetic, contented
father. But to this end everything that ever happened would have to be undone, that is, we ourselves should have to be
canceled out.
But we being what we are, marrying is barred to me because it is your very own domain. Sometimes I imagine the map of
the world spread out and you stretched diagonally across it. And I feel as if I could consider living in only those regions that
either are not covered by you or are not within your reach. And, in keeping with the conception I have of your magnitude,
these are not many and not very comforting regions—and marriage is not among them.
This very comparison proves that I certainly do not mean to say that you drove me away from marriage by your example,
as you had driven me away from your business. Quite the contrary, despite the remote similarity. In your marriage I had
before me what was, in many ways, a model marriage, a model in constancy, mutual help, number of children; and even
when the children grew up and increasingly disturbed the peace, the marriage as such remained undisturbed. Perhaps I
formed my high idea of marriage on this model; the desire for marriage was powerless for other reasons. Those lay in
your relation to your children, which is, after all, what this whole letter is about.
There is a view according to which fear of marriage sometimes has its source in a fear that one's children would some day
pay one back for the sins one has committed against one's own parents. This, I believe, has no very great significance in
my case, for my sense of guilt actually originates in you, and is filled with such conviction of its uniqueness—indeed, this
feeling of uniqueness is an essential part of its tormenting nature—that any repetition is unthinkable. All the same, I must
say that I would find such a mute, glum, dry, doomed son unbearable; I daresay that, if there were no other possibility, I
would flee from him, emigrate, as you had planned to do if I had married. And this may also have had some influence on
my incapacity to marry.
What is much more important in all this, however, is the anxiety about myself. This has to be understood as follows: I have
already indicated that in my writing, and in everything connected with it, I have made some attempts at independence,
attempts at escape, with the very smallest of success; they will scarcely lead any farther; much confirms this for me.
Nevertheless it is my duty or, rather, the essence of my life, to watch over them, to let no danger that I can avert, indeed
no possibility of such a danger, approach them. Marriage bears the possibility of such a danger, though also the possibility
of the greatest help; for me, however, it is enough that there is the possibility of a danger. What should I do if it did turn
out to be a danger! How could I continue living in matrimony with the perhaps unprovable, but nevertheless irrefutable
feeling that this danger existed? Faced with this I may waver, but the final outcome is certain: I must renounce. The simile
of the bird in the hand and the Twoin the bush has only a fiery remote application here. In my hand I have nothing, in the
bush is everything, and yet—so it is decided by the conditions of battle and the exigency of life—I must choose the nothing.
I had to make a similar choice when I chose my profession.
The most important obstacle to marriage, however, is the no longer eradicable conviction that what is essential to the
support of a family and especially to its guidance, is what I have recognized in you; and indeed everything rolled into one,
good and bad, as it is organically combined in you—strength, and scorn of others, health, and a certain immoderation,
eloquence and inadequacy, self-confidence and dissatisfaction with everyone else, a worldly wisdom and tyranny,
knowledge of human nature and mistrust of most people; then also good qualities without any drawback, such as industry,
endurance, presence of mind, and fearlessness. By comparison I had almost nothing or very little of all this; and was it on
this basis that I wanted to risk marrying, when I could see for myself that even you had to fight hard in marriage and,
where the children were concerned, had even failed? Of course, I did not put this question to myself in so many words and
I did not answer it in so many words; otherwise everyday thinking would have taken over and shown me other men who
are different from you (to name one, near at hand, who is very different from you: Uncle Richard) and yet have married
and have at least not collapsed under the strain, which is in itself a great deal and would have been quite enough for me.
But I did not ask this question, I lived it from childhood on. I tested myself not only when faced with marriage, but in the
face of every trifle; in the face of every trifle you by your example and your method of upbringing convinced me, as I have
tried to describe, of my incapacity; and what turned out to be true of every trifle and proved you right, had to be fearfully
true of the greatest thing of all: of marriage. Up to the time of my marriage attempts I grew up more or less like a
businessman who lives from day to day, with worries and forebodings, but without keeping proper accounts. He makes a
few small profits—which he constantly pampers and exaggerates in his imagination because of their rarity—but otherwise
he has daily losses. Everything is entered, but never balanced. Now comes the necessity of drawing a balance, that is, the
attempt at marriage. And with the large sums that have to be taken into account here it is as though there had never been
even the smallest profit, everything one single great liability. And now marry without going mad!
That is what my life with you has been like up to now, and these are the prospects inherent in it for the future.
If you look at the reasons I offer for the fear I have of you, you might answer: "You maintain I make things easy for myself
by explaining my relation to you simply as being your fault, but I believe that despite your outward effort, you do not make
things more difficult for yourself, but much more profitable. At first you too repudiate all guilt and responsibility; in this our
methods are the same. But whereas I then attribute the sole guilt to you as frankly as I mean it, you want to be 'overly
clever' and 'overly affectionate' at the same time and acquit me also of all guilt. Of course, in the latter you only seem to
succeed (and more you do not even want), and what appears between the lines, in spite of all the 'turns of phrase' about
character and nature and antagonism and helplessness, is that actually I have been the aggressor, while everything you
were up to was self-defense. By now you would have achieved enough by your very insincerity, for you have proved three
things: first, that you are not guilty; second, that I am the guilty one; and third, that out of sheer magnanimity you are
ready not only to forgive me but (what is both more and less) also to prove and be willing to believe yourself that—contrary
to the truth—I also am not guilty. That ought to be enough for you now, but it is still not enough. You have put it into your
head to live entirely off me. I admit that we fight with each other, but there are Two kinds of combat. The chivalrous
combat, in which independent opponents pit their strength against each other, each on his own, each losing on his own,
each winning on his own. And there is the combat of vermin, which not only sting but, on top of it, suck your blood in order
to sustain their own life. That's what the real professional soldier is, and that's what you are. You are unfit for life; to make
life comfortable for yourself, without worries and without self-reproaches, you prove that I have taken your fitness for life
away from you and put it in my own pocket. Why should it bother you that you are unfit for life, since I have the
responsibility for it, while you calmly stretch out and let yourself be hauled through life, physically and mentally, by me. For
example: when you recently wanted to marry, you wanted—and this you do, after all, admit in this letter—at the same time
not to marry, but in order not to have to exert yourself you wanted me to help you with this not-marrying, by forbidding this
marriage because of the 'disgrace' this union would bring upon my name. I did not dream of it. First, in this as in
everything else I never wanted to be 'an obstacle to your happiness,' and second, I never want to have to hear such a
reproach from my child. But did the self-restraint with which I left the marriage up to you do me any good? Not in the
least. My aversion to your marriage would not have prevented it; on the contrary, it would have been an added incentive
for you to marry the girl, for it would have made the 'attempt at escape,' as you put it, complete. And my consent to your
marriage did not prevent your reproaches, for you prove that I am in any case to blame for your not marrying. Basically,
however, in this as in everything else you have only proved to me that all my reproaches were justified, and that one
especially justified charge was still missing: namely, the charge of insincerity, obsequiousness and parasitism. If I am not
very much mistaken, you are preying on me even with this letter itself."
My answer to this is that, after all, this whole rejoinder— which can partly also be turned against you—does not come from
you, but from me. Not even your mistrust of others is as great as my self-mistrust, which you have bred in me. I do not
deny a certain justification for this rejoinder, which in itself contributes new material to the characterization of our
relationship. Naturally things cannot in reality fit together the way the evidence does in my letter; life is more than a
Chinese puzzle. But with the correction made by this rejoinder—a correction I neither can nor will elaborate in detail—in
my opinion something has been achieved which so closely approximates the truth that it might reassure us both a little and
make our living and our dying easier